Moeller's student-run newspaper, The Crusader, is consistently recognized as being one of the top in the region.
In 2008, The Crusader won First Place, the second-highest honor a high school newspaper can receive from the American Scholastic Press Association [REF].
The Squire is a student literary journal that features stories, poems, and essays written by Moeller students.
Paul Keels - play-by-play announcer for Ohio State University football and basketball on WBNS-FM .
Joe Uecker - Ohio State Senator (R-66) .
Rico Murray - Undrafted free agent signee by the Cincinnati Bengals.
Tony Hunter - professional football player for Buffalo Bills and Los Angeles Rams.
Jack Norris - President and co-founder of Vegan Outreach .
Archbishop Moeller High School was established in Fall 1958 when Archbishop Karl J. Alter appointed Monsignor Edward A. McCarthy and Brother Paul Sibbing, S.M., to supervise the planning and construction of a new high school near Montgomery, Ohio.
Moeller High School opened its doors in September 1960, along with La Salle High School, a fellow Cincinnati Archdiocesan school.
When it opened its doors in 1960, Moeller High School received students from over 15 parishes in the northeastern part of the Greater Cincinnati area, drawing from Roger Bacon High School and Purcell Marian High School, two other all-male comprehensive Cincinnati Archdiocesan schools.
Starting with the freshman class of 1999, Moeller High School adopted a new laptop program.
Quite a number of countermeasures have been installed to counteract misuse of the computers, including web filtering, to monitor how students use their computers.
The Moeller art program is a nationally recognized four-year program which culminates in Advanced Placement Studio Art and Art History [REF].
The Moeller Crusaders have a long history of athletic success.
The lacrosse team have won two state titles and have been a constant force in the state and midwest.
Moeller High School's athletic teams - with the exception of boxing, lacrosse, skiing, and volleyball - are sanctioned by the Ohio High School Athletic Association (OHSAA) and compete in the Greater Catholic League South, along with Elder, St. Xavier and La Salle High Schools.
Recently, Moeller unveiled plans to build a multipurpose stadium on campus (named Gerry Faust Athletic Complex with an 8-foot bronze statue honoring him at the entrance); however, the plan faced strong criticism from neighboring homeowners, and Moeller's request to change the zoning regulation was denied.
The 2007 title went to the second team in Ohio high school boys' volleyball history to go undefeated.
The circular flow diagram is an abstraction of the economy as a whole.
The abstraction ignores the linear throughput of matter and energy that must power the continuous motion of money, goods and services, and factors of production.
This is not to say that the circular flow diagram is useful in understanding the basics of an economy, such as leakages and injections.
The circular flow of income is a concept for better understanding of the economy as a whole and for example the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPAs).
Alternatively, one can think of these transactions in terms of the monetary flows that occur.
The circular flow diagram illustrates the interdependence of the "flows," or activities, that occur in the economy, such as the production of goods and services (or the "output" of the economy) and the income generated from that production.
Of course, the total economy is much more complicated than the illustration above.
] One of the earliest ideas on the circular flow was explained in the work of 18th century Irish-French economist Richard Cantillon,[REF] who was influenced by prior economists, especially William Petty [REF].
François Quesnay further developed these concepts, and was the first to visualize these interactions over time in the so-called Tableau économique [REF].
First, regulation impedes the flow of income throughout all social classes and therefore economic development.
Second, taxes on the productive classes such as farmers should be reduced in favor of higher taxes for unproductive classes such as landowners, since their luxurious way of life distorts the income flow.
In Marxian economics, economic reproduction refers to recurrent (or cyclical) processes[REF] by which the initial conditions necessary for economic activity to occur are constantly re-created [REF].
Economic reproduction involves the physical production and distribution of goods and services, the trade (the circulation via exchanges and transactions) of goods and services, and the consumption of goods and services (both productive or intermediate consumption and final consumption).
Marx distinguishes between "simple reproduction" and "expanded (or enlarged) reproduction" [REF].
An important development was John Maynard Keynes' 1933 publication of the General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.
The first to visualize the modern circular flow of income model was Frank Knight in 1933 publication of The Economic Organization.[REF]
[we may view the] economic organization as a system of prize relations.
# Measurement of National Income - National income is an estimation of aggregation of any of economic activity of the circular flow.
# Knowledge of Interdependence - Circular flow of income signifies the interdependence of each of activity upon one another.
# Unending Nature of Economic Activities - It signifies that production, income and expenditure are of unending nature, therefore, economic activities in an economy can never come to a halt.
# Injections and Leakages .
Y = E = O This means that the expenditure of buyers (households) becomes income for sellers (firms).
Households spend all of their income (Y) on goods and services or consumption (C).
All output (O) produced by firms is purchased by households through their expenditure (E).
There is no financial sector.
There is no government sector.
There is no foreign sector .
It includes household sector, producing sector and government sector.
Each of the above sectors receives some payments from the other in lieu of goods and services which makes a regular flow of goods and physical services.
Injection means introduction of income into the flow.
In the financial sector In terms of the circular flow of income model, the leakage that financial institutions provide in the economy is the option for households to save their money.
In the government sector The leakage that the Government sector provides is through the collection of revenue through Taxes (T) that is provided by households and firms to the government.
In the overseas sector The main leakage from this sector are imports (M), which represent spending by residents into the rest of the world.
Table 1 All leakages and injections in the five sector model .
In terms of the five sector circular flow of income model the state of equilibrium occurs when the total leakages are equal to the total injections that occur in the economy.
Savings + Taxes + Imports = Investment + Government Spending + Exports .
S + T + M = I + G + X.
S + T + M ≠ I + G + X .
The effects of disequilibrium vary according to which of the above equations they belong to.
If S + T + M > I + G + X the levels of income, output, expenditure and employment will fall causing a recession or contraction in the overall economic activity.
S + T + M > I + G + X the levels of income, expenditure and output will fall causing a contraction or recession in the overall economic activity.
The other equation of [[Economic equilibrium|disequilibrium]], if S + T + M < I + G + X in the five sector model the levels of income, expenditure and output will greatly rise causing a boom in economic activity.
# Real flow is the exchange of goods and services between household and firms whereas money flow is the monetary exchange between two sectors.
# In real flow household sector supplies raw material, land, labour, capital and enterprise to firms and in return firms sector provides finished goods and services to household sector.
# When goods and services flow from one sector of the economy to another, it is known as real flow.
Production, consumption expenditure and generation of income are the three basic economic activities of an economy that go on endlessly and are titled as circular flow of income.
The Watts are closely connected to the Fowlers.
The Watts family are also very strongly connected to the Beale family.
On 13 August 2012, Sharon returned to Walford with Dennis Jnr and became instantly involved with the prominent Branning family; she shared a flirtatious relationship with Jack and soon befriended his brother Max and ultimately his partner Tanya Cross, whom she initially feuded.
The Watts family were one of the central families introduced to viewers when EastEnders began in 1985, created by the show's co-creators Tony Holland and Julia Smith.
In April 1988, Anita Dobson made her last appearance as Angie Watts, and soon afterwards Leslie Grantham expressed his desire to step down from the role of Den Watts.
However, the popularity of the Watts to viewers and the importance of the family to the show meant that successive producers and executives continually asked Dean, Dobson, and Grantham to reprise their roles [REF].
Den's return was widely regarded as a coup and seen as instrumental to EastEnders success at the time,[REF] which was facing tight competition from the ITV soaps, with Coronation Street enjoying one of its most successful years ever,[REF] and Emmerdale in the midst of a ratings revival.
Again, the family was to be increasingly dominated by the volatile relationship between husband and wife, culminating in Den's death in February 2005, after Leslie Grantham decided not to extend his current contract.
Despite an official BBC report in 2005 stating that Letitia Dean was taking a scheduled break and would return to EastEnders later in 2006, this did not happen and she was away from the show for more than six years.
The importance of the Vic to the Watts became obvious when Sharon returned to lay claim to the pub after a 6-year absence.
The return of Den (after 14 years) took the conflict between the two families to another level.
Soon after, Den was joined by his second wife Chrissie, and the pair proceeded to bring down the whole Mitchell financial empire, bankrupting the family in a scam and retaking control of the Vic.
In August 2012, Sharon sought out Phil's help after her son Dennis (Harry Hickles) had been kidnapped by her fiancé John Hewland (Jesse Birdsall).
In November 2015, Gavin Sullivan (Paul Nicholas) revealed that both he and Den Watts were in a gang with Eric Mitchell during the 1960s when they were growing up together in Walford.
Throughout their years on-screen, the Watts have been one of EastEnders most tried and tested sources of drama and tragedy.
The 1986 Christmas Day episode during which Den delivered Angie divorce papers is the highest rated airing of any British soap in television history.
The return of Sharon six years later in 2001 became a seminal moment for the show,[REF] eclipsed only by the intense media scrutiny surrounding Den's return two years later [REF].
However, the Watts family have also received criticism from the press and viewers.
The Watts are a notably fractured family; it is a condition that has made them strong-willed, independent, yet also volatile and vulnerable (especially to each other).
The Watts centre on the figure of Den, who casts a strong shadow over the family.
]Much of the drama in the Watts household centres on responses to Den's selfish actions and manipulative ways.
Although Den's first and second wives only appeared on-screen for a combined total of 5 years (Angie from 1985-88; Chrissie from 2004-2005), they had an immense impact on the show and on the Watts family.
As adopted mother and stepmother, both Angie and Chrissie were fiercely protective of their charges.
Rather, the two Mrs Watts were highly individual and volatile figures, dominated by their relationship to Den.
It is the relationship between Den and his "princess" that is the central dynamic of the Watts family.
The most common method for cantilever-deflection measurements is the beam-deflection method.
The relative popularity of the beam-deflection method can be explained by its high sensitivity and simple operation, and by the fact that cantilevers do not require electrical contacts or other special treatments, and can therefore be fabricated relatively cheaply with sharp integrated tips.
Many other methods for beam-deflection measurements exist.
Piezoelectric detection - Cantilevers made from quartz[REF] (such as the qPlus configuration), or other piezoelectric materials can directly detect deflection as an electrical signal.
Laser Doppler vibrometry - A laser Doppler vibrometer can be used to produce very accurate deflection measurements for an oscillating cantilever[REF] (thus is only used in non-contact mode).
STM - The first atomic microscope used an STM complete with its own feedback mechanism to measure deflection [REF].
Optical interferometry - Optical interferometry can be used to measure cantilever deflection [REF].
Capacitive detection - Metal coated cantilevers can form a capacitor with another contact located behind the cantilever [REF].
Piezoresistive detection - Cantilevers can be fabricated with piezoresistive elements that act as a strain gauge.
Image formation is a plotting method that produces a color mapping through changing the x-y position of the tip while scanning and recording the measured variable, i.e. the intensity of control signal, to each x-y coordinate.
Operation mode of Image forming of the AFM are generally classified into two groups from the viewpoint whether it uses z-Feedback loop (not shown) to maintain the tip-sample distance to keep signal intensity exported by the detector.
Details will be explained in the case that especially "constant df mode"(FM-AFM) among AFM as an instance in next section.
When the sample has concavity and convexity, the distance between the tip-apex and the sample varies in accordance with the concavity and convexity accompanied with a scan of the sample along x-y direction (without height regulation in z-direction) .
On the other hand, the df may be kept constant by moving the probe upward and downward (See (3) of FIG.5) in z-direction using a negative feedback (by using z-feedback loop) while the raster scan of the sample surface along the x-y direction .
Just like any other tool, an AFM's usefulness has limitations.
AFM has several advantages over the scanning electron microscope (SEM).
A disadvantage of AFM compared with the scanning electron microscope (SEM) is the single scan image size.
The scanning speed of an AFM is also a limitation.
AFM images can also be affected by nonlinearity, hysteresis,[REF] and creep of the piezoelectric material and cross-talk between the x, y, z axes that may require software enhancement and filtering.
Primary orofacial herpes is readily identified by clinical examination of persons with no previous history of lesions and contact with an individual with known HSV-1 infection.
Genital herpes can be more difficult to diagnose than oral herpes, since most HSV-2-infected persons have no classical symptoms [REF].
Until the 1980s serological tests for antibodies to HSV were rarely useful to diagnosis and not routinely used in clinical practice [REF].
It should not be confused with conditions caused by other viruses in the herpesviridae family such as herpes zoster, which is caused by varicella zoster virus.
No method eradicates herpes virus from the body, but antiviral medications can reduce the frequency, duration, and severity of outbreaks.
Several antiviral drugs are effective for treating herpes, including acyclovir, valaciclovir (valacyclovir), famciclovir, and penciclovir.
Evidence supports the use of acyclovir and valacyclovir in the treatment of herpes labialis[REF] as well as herpes infections in people with cancer [REF].
A number of topical antivirals are effective for herpes labialis, including acyclovir, penciclovir, and docosanol [REF].
Certain dietary supplements and alternative remedies are claimed to be beneficial in the treatment of herpes [REF].
Genital herpes simplex was not always stigmatised.
Pedro Cuatrecasas states, "during the R&D of acyclovir (Zovirax), marketing [department of Burroughs Wellcome] insisted that there were 'no markets' for this compound.
Since the creation of the herpes hype, some people experience negative feelings related to the condition following diagnosis, in particular if they have acquired the genital form of the disease.
In a 2007 study, 1900 people (25% of which had herpes) ranked genital herpes second for social stigma, out of all sexually transmitted diseases (HIV took the top spot for STD stigma) [REF].
An important source of support is the National Herpes Resource Center which arose from the work of the American Social Health Association (ASHA) [REF].
In the UK, the Herpes Association (now the Herpes Viruses Association) was started in 1982, becoming a registered charity with a Dept of Health grant in 1985.
Research has gone into vaccines for both prevention and treatment of herpes infections.
Another possibility to eradicate the HSV-1 variant is being pursued by a team at Duke University.
A genomic study of the herpes simplex type 1 virus confirmed the human migration pattern theory called 'out-of-Africa hypothesis' [REF].
Worldwide rates of either HSV-1 and/or HSV-2 are between 60 and 95% in adults [REF].
In the US, 58% of the population is infected with HSV-1[REF] and 16% are infected with HSV-2.
The annual incidence in Canada of genital herpes due to HSV-1 and HSV-2 infection is not known (for a review of HSV-1/HSV-2 prevalence and incidence studies worldwide, see Smith and Robinson 2002).
In British Columbia in 1999, the seroprevalence of HSV-2 antibody in leftover serum submitted for antenatal testing revealed a prevalence of 17%, ranging from 7% in women 15-19 years old to 28% in those 40-44 years [REF].
In Norway, a study published in 2000 found that 90% of genital initial infections were due to HSV-1 [REF].
In Nova Scotia, 58% of 1,790 HSV isolates from genital lesion cultures in women were HSV-1; in men, 37% of 468 isolates were HSV-1 [REF].
The Iroquois, also known as the Haudenosaunee or the "People of the Longhouse",[REF] .
Prior to the creation of Upper Canada in 1791 much land had already been ceded by the First Nations to the Crown in accordance with the Royal Proclamation of 1763.
Land was granted to these allied Six Nations who had served on the British side during the American Revolution by the Haldimand Proclamation (1784).
Crown land policy to 1825 was multi-fold in the use of a "free" resource that had value to people who themselves may have little or no money for its purchase and for the price of settling upon it to support themselves and a create a new society.
The Calton weavers were a community of handweavers established in the community of Calton, then in Lanarkshire just outside Glasgow, Scotland in the 18th century [REF].
In 1825, 1,878 Irish immigrants from the city of Cork arrived in the community of Scott's Plains.
Thomas Talbot emigrated in 1791, where he became personal secretary to John Graves Simcoe, Lieutenant-Governor of Upper Canada.
The Crown reserves, one seventh of all lands granted, were to provide the provincial executive with an independent source of revenue not under the control of the elected Assembly.
The land grant policy changed after 1825 as the Upper Canadian administration faced a financial crisis that would otherwise require raising local taxes, thereby making it more dependent on a local elected legislature.
Few chose to lease the Crown reserves as long as free grants of land were still available.
The plan for the Canada Company was promoted by the province's Attorney General, John Beverly Robinson, then studying law at Lincoln's Inn in London.
According to the Canada Company, "the poorest individual can here procure for himself and family a valuable tract; which, with a little labour, he can soon convert into a comfortable home, such as he could probably never attain in any other country - all his own!"
The Huron Tract lies in the counties of Huron, Perth, Middlesex and present day Lambton County, Ontario bordering on Lake Huron to the west and Lake Erie to the east.
The Clergy Corporation was incorporated in 1819 to manage the Clergy Reserves.
In Upper Canada, major cities with key forts were an essential for survival, defending the area from armed attacks and composing the local militia.
Upper Canada's constitution was said to be "the very image and transcript" of the British constitution, and based on the principal of "mixed monarchy" - a balance of monarchy, aristocracy and democracy [REF].
The Executive Council of Upper Canada had a similar function to the Cabinet in England but was not responsible to the Legislative Assembly.
The Legislative branch of the government consisted of the parliament comprising legislative council and legislative assembly.
The Legislative Council of Upper Canada was the upper house governing the province of Upper Canada.
The Legislative Assembly of Upper Canada functioned as the lower house in the Parliament of Upper Canada.
Local government in the Province of Upper Canada was based on districts.
Justices of the Peace were appointed by the Lt. Governor.
Additional districts were created from the existing districts as the population grew until 1849, when local government mainly based on counties came into effect.
In 1807 the Grammar School Act allowed the government to take over various grammar schools across the province and incorporating them into a network of eight new, public grammar schools (secondary schools), one for each of the eight districts (Eastern, Johnstown, Midland, Newcastle, Home, Niagara, London, and Western) [REF].
Eastern Grammar School in New Johnstown or current day Cornwall, Ontario - founded as Cornwall Grammar School and later became Cornwall Collegiate and Vocational School.
Home District Grammar School in York, Upper Canada, later becoming Royal Grammar School, Toronto High School and finally to the current name Jarvis Collegiate Institute.
Since the province is frequently referred to as "English Canada" after the Union of the Canadas, and its ethnic homogeneity said to be a factor in the Upper Canada Rebellion of 1837, it is interesting to note the range of ethnic groups in Upper Canada.
Anishinaabe or Anishinabe-or more properly (plural) Anishinaabeg or Anishinabek.
The Iroquois, also known as the Haudenosaunee or the "People of the Longhouse",[REF] .
Many British and French-Canadian fur traders married First Nations and Inuit women from the Cree, Ojibwa, or Saulteaux First Nations.
Early settlements in the region include the Mission of Sainte-Marie among the Hurons at Midland in 1649, Sault Ste.
The Act Against Slavery passed in Upper Canada on July 9, 1793.
The Great Migration from Britain from 1815-1850 has been numbered at 800,000.
The Church was led by the Rev. John Strachan (1778-1867), a pillar of the Family Compact.
Father Alexander Macdonell was a Scottish Catholic priest who formed his evicted clan into The Glengarry Fencibles regiment, of which he served as chaplain.
Macdonell's role on the Legislative Council was one of the tensions with the Toronto congregation, led by Father William O'Grady.
The undisputed leader of the highly fractious Methodists in Upper Canada was Egerton Ryerson, editor of their newspaper, The Christian Guardian.
The earliest Presbyterian ministers in Upper Canada came from various denominations based in Scotland, Ireland, and the United States.
These groups of later Loyalists were proportionately larger in the early decades of the province's settlement.
In the decade ending in 1837, the population of Upper Canada doubled, to 397,489, fed in large part by erratic spurts of displaced paupers, the "surplus population" of the British Isles.
The roots of Wilmot-Horton's "assisted emigration" policies began in April, 1820, in the middle of an insurrection in Glasgow, where a young, already twice bankrupted William Lyon Mackenzie was setting sail for Canada on a ship called Psyche.
See Coins of Upper Canada.
The government of Upper Canada never issued a provincial currency.
Paper currency was issued primarily by the Bank of Upper Canada, although with the diversification of the banking system, each bank would issue its own distinctive notes [REF].
The Bank of Upper Canada was "captured" from Kingston merchants by the York elite at the instigation of John Strachan in 1821, with the assistance of William Allan, a Toronto merchant and Executive Councillor.
The difference between the chartered banks and the joint stock banks lay almost entirely on the issue of liability and its implications for the issuance of bank notes.
After the Napoleonic Wars, as industrial production in Britain took off, English manufacturers began dumping cheap goods in Montreal; this allowed an increasing number of shopkeepers in York to obtain their goods competitively from Montreal wholesalers.
Another of those new wholesale businesses was the Farmers' Storehouse Company.
Upper Canada was in the unenviable position of having few exports with which to pay for all its imported manufactured needs.
Given the small amounts of saleable wheat and flour, and the rarity of cash, some have questioned how market oriented these early farmers were.
The Ottawa River timber trade resulted from Napoleon's 1806 Continental Blockade in Europe.
The timber trade was Upper and Lower Canada's major industry in terms of employment and value of the product.
The Family Compact is the epithet applied to an oligarchic group of men who exercised most of the political and judicial power in Upper Canada from the 1810s to the 1840s.
There were many outstanding individual reform politicians in Upper Canada, including Robert Randal, Peter Perry, Marshall Spring Bidwell, William Ketchum and Dr. William Warren Baldwin; however, organized collective reform activity began with Robert Fleming Gourlay.
The next wave of organized Reform activity emerged in the 1830s through the work of William Lyon Mackenzie, James Lesslie, John Rolph, William John O'Grady and Dr Thomas Morrison, all of Toronto.
The Upper Canada Central Political Union was organized in 1832-33 by Dr Thomas David Morrison (mayor of Toronto in 1836) while William Lyon Mackenzie was in England.
The Canadian Alliance Society was reborn as the Constitutional Reform Society (1836), when it was led by the more moderate reformer, Dr William W. Baldwin.
The Upper Canada Rebellion was an insurrection against the oligarchic government of the Family Compact by W.L. Mackenzie in December 1837.
John Lambton, Lord Durham's support for "responsible government" undercut the Tories and gradually led the public to reject what it viewed as poor administration, unfair land and education policies, and inadequate attention to urgent transportation needs.
After the Rebellions, the new governor, Charles Poulett Thomson, 1st Baron Sydenham, proved an exemplary Utilitarian, despite his aristocratic pretensions.
Sydenham introduced a vast expansion of the state apparatus through the introduction of municipal government.
The early nineteenth century was the age of canals.
The Rideau Canal's purpose was military and hence was paid for by the British and not the local treasury.
The Welland Canal was created to directly link Lake Erie with Lake Ontario, bypassing Niagara Falls and the Erie Canal.
By the time the canal was finished in 1837, it had cost the province £425,000 in loans and stock subscriptions.
The Desjardins Canal, named after its promoter Pierre Desjardins, was built to give Dundas, Ontario, easier access to Burlington Bay and Lake Ontario.
There is disagreement as to whether the Canadian built Frontenac (170 feet), launched on September 7, 1816, at Ernestown, Ontario or the U.S. built Ontario (110 feet), launched in the spring of 1817 at Sacketts Harbor, New York, was the first steamboat on the Great Lakes.
In the years between 1809 and 1837 just over 100 steamboats were launched by Upper and Lower Canadians for the St. Lawrence River and Great Lakes trade, of which ten operated on Lake Ontario [REF].
The major owner-operators of steamships on Lake Ontario were Donald Bethune, John Hamilton, Hugh Richardson, and Henry Gildersleeve, each of whom would have invested a substantial fortune [REF].
Besides marine travel, Upper Canada had a few Post roads or footpaths used for transportation by horse or stagecoaches along the key settlements between London to Kingston.
The Governor's Road was built beginning in 1793 from Dundas to Paris and then to the proposed capital of London by 1794.
A second route was known as Lakeshore Road or York Road which was built from York to Trent River from 1799 to 1900 and later extended eastwards to Kingston in 1817.
The control the French had over Canada was handed over to Great Britain in 1763 when the Treaty of Paris ended the Seven Years' War in America.
The part of the province west of Montreal and Quebec in the upper river basin soon began receiving many English-speaking Protestant United Empire Loyalists who arrived in the area as refugees from the American Revolution.
"Upper Canada" became a political entity on December 26, 1791 with the Parliament of Great Britain's passage of the Constitutional Act of 1791.
On February 1, 1796, the capital of Upper Canada was moved from Newark (now Niagara-on-the-Lake) to York (now Toronto), which was judged to be less vulnerable to attack by the Americans.
The Act of Union 1840, passed July 23, 1840 by the British Parliament and proclaimed by the Crown on February 10, 1841, merged Upper Canada with Lower Canada to form the short-lived United Province of Canada.
During the War of 1812 with the United States, Upper Canada was the chief target of the Americans, since it was weakly defended and populated largely by American immigrants.
Detroit was captured by the British on August 6, 1812.
Major battles fought on territory in Upper Canada included
Many other battles were fought in American territory bordering Upper Canada, including the Northwest Territory (most in modern-day Michigan), upstate New York and naval battles in the Great Lakes.
The Treaty of Ghent (ratified in 1815) ended the war and restored the status quo ante bellum.
Mackenzie, Duncombe, John Rolph and 200 supporters fled to Navy Island in the Niagara River, where they declared themselves the Republic of Canada on December 13.
On January 13, 1838, under attack by British armaments, the rebels fled.
The extended series of incidents comprising the Patriot War were finally settled by U.S. Secretary of State Daniel Webster and Alexander Baring, 1st Baron Ashburton, in the course of their negotiations leading to the Webster-Ashburton Treaty of 1842.
San Juan is the largest city in Puerto Rico by population [REF].
Among the Hispanic and Latino population, Puerto Ricans are, unsurprisingly, the largest group; they make up 87.5% of San Juan's Hispanic population.
There are 13,304 whites of non-Hispanic origin living in San Juan; 10,571 blacks of non-Hispanic origin living in San Juan.
According to the 2006-2008 American Community Survey, 87.5% of San Juan's population was native and 12.5% were foreign-born.
In terms of ancestry, 23,875 people claimed American ancestry, which is equivalent to 5.8% of San Juan's population.
San Juan experienced significant economic growth following World War II.
Seaborne Airlines is headquartered on the 9th floor of the World Plaza Building in San Juan [REF].
Technological advances after World War II in the development of the airliner, coupled with the island's climate and natural setting, have transformed San Juan into the springboard for tourism around the island, and has made the rest of the Caribbean known throughout the world during the last fifty years [REF].
As one of Puerto Rico's 78 municipalities, San Juan's government consists of two branches, the executive and the legislative.
The executive branch is headed by a popularly elected mayor.
San Juan is also the seat of the Puerto Rico Senatorial district I, which is represented by two Senators [REF].
In 2010 there were 201 slayings in San Juan, a rate of around 50 per 100,000 residents.
The Port of San Juan is the fourth busiest seaport in the Western Hemisphere, ranked among the top 17 in the world in terms of container movement.
The Metropolitan Area is served by two airports.
At 4,300 vehicles per paved mile, San Juan has by far the highest density of vehicles on the road of any country in the world [REF].
The Metropolitan Bus Authority (Autoridad Metropolitana de Autobuses or AMA in Spanish) provides daily bus transportation to residents of San Juan, Guaynabo, Bayamón, Toa Baja, Trujillo Alto, Cataño and Carolina through 30 fixed routes.
In an attempt to decrease vehicle dependency and road congestion, the city built a metro system dubbed "Tren Urbano" ("Urban Train").
Increased investment in public transportation, however, has not changed the fact that San Juan is an automobile reliant city and its fast growth has sparked urban sprawl.
San Juan has an elaborate system of triage, hospital, and preventive care health services.
San Juan Pediatric Hospital - Also operated by the San Juan municipal government.
The city of San Juan operates 10 hospitals.
Also, there are 10 private hospitals in San Juan.
In 1508, Juan Ponce de León founded the original settlement which he called Caparra.
The city was witness to attacks from the English led by Sir Francis Drake in 1595 (in what is known as the Battle of Puerto Rico) and by George Clifford, Earl of Cumberland, in 1598.
The British attack in 1797, during the French Revolutionary Wars, led by Sir Ralph Abercromby (who had just conquered Trinidad).
In 1919, Félix Rigau Carrera, "El Aguila de Sabana Grande" (The Eagle from Sabana Grande), the first Puerto Rican pilot, became the first native Puerto Rican to fly an aircraft in the island when he flew his Curtiss JN-4 from Las Casas.
On January 2, 1947, the people of San Juan elected Felisa Rincón de Gautier (also known as Doña Fela) (1897-1994) as their mayor.
On March 8, 1948 the city government of San Juan officially adopted as the city's first flag an orange field, in the center of which is the Coat of Arms of the City.
San Juan is the birthplace of artists and musicians, locally known as Sanjuaneros, who have significantly influenced Puerto Rican culture.
The Puerto Rico Museum of Contemporary Art, located in Santurce, specializes in contemporary artwork from Latin America and the Caribbean.
Other museums such as the Pablo Casals Museum, the Book Museum, Americas Museum and the National Gallery display historic items and artwork alongside contemporary art [REF].
The architecture of San Juan is very diverse, due to its size and all the cultural influences received during its existence.
The architecture is more varied in other districts of the city.
What is now known as Old San Juan occupied the western end of a rocky islet, the Isleta de San Juan, at the mouth of San Juan Bay.
During the Spanish colonial times most of the urban population resided in what is now known as Old San Juan.
The main central part of the city is characterized by narrow streets made of blue cobblestone and picturesque colonial buildings, some of which date back to the 16th and 17th century.
East of Old San Juan lies the wealthy tourist-oriented neighborhood of Condado, which occupies land that used to be owned by entrepreneur Pablo Ubarri Capetillo, a Spanish railroad developer and Count of San José de Santurce under the Spanish colonial period.
Near Condado are two separate business districts, Santurce and Miramar.
Santurce, originally named San Mateo de Cangrejos (Saint Matthew of the Crabs), was a settlement for freed African slaves during the early days of the city.
In the southern part of the city is the socially diversified community of Río Piedras.
Teams based in San Juan have been notably successful in athletic competition.
Host of the 1966 Central American and Caribbean Games [REF].
Host of the 1979 Pan American Games [REF].
Has been host of the Caribbean World Series nine times [REF].
Major League Baseball's Montreal Expos played 22 home games at Hiram Bithorn Stadium in both 2003 and 2004 [REF].
Host of the 1974 FIBA World Championship (basketball) [REF].
Has been host of the FIBA Americas Championship five times (1980, 1993, 1999, 2003, 2009).
The first edition of World Wrestling Entertainment's pay per view New Year's Revolution was held at the José Miguel Agrelot Coliseum in January 2005 [REF].
The recently built $28 million San Juan Natatorium is beginning to attract islandwide and regional swim meets, as well winter training by top-rated mainland U.S. colleges and universities, including the United States Military Academy at West Point and the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis.
In July 2007, the San Juan Golf Academy and its driving range began operating atop the city's former sanitary landfill in Puerto Nuevo and will eventually include the city's first and only 9-hole golf course.
Wang Mang was a nephew of the Dowager Empress Wang, In AD 9, he usurped the throne, and founded the Xin Dynasty.
Yi Dao Ping Wu Qian () on which the Yi Dao characters are inlaid in gold.
契刀五百 Qi Dao Wu Bai () .
Between AD 9 and 10 he introduced an impossibly complex system involving tortoise shell, cowries, gold, silver, six round copper coins, and a reintroduction of the spade money in ten denominations.
In AD 14, all these tokens were abolished, and replaced by another type of spade coin and new round coins.
Bu Quan () was known later as the Nan Qian (), from the belief that if a woman wore this on her sash, she would give birth to a boy.
By this time, a full monetary economy had developed.
On average, millet cost 75 cash and polished rice 140 cash a hectolitre, a horse 4,400-4,500 cash.
The San Zhu () coin was issued either between 140-136 BC, or between 119-118 BC.
The Wu Zhu () was first issued in 118 BC, this inscription was used on coins of many regimes over the next 700 years.
Jun Guo Wu Zhu () (118-115 BC) is a large and heavy coin, with the edges not filed.
Chi Ze Wu Zhu () (115-113 BC) is a lighter coin than the above, with filed edges.
Shang Lin San Guan Wu Zhu () (From 113 BC) refers to the Three Offices of Shang Lin Park which were the Office for Coinage, the Office for Sorting Copper, and the Office of Price Equalisation.
Wu Zhu Coins (AD 25).
The Iron Wu Zhu, resembling the W. Han coin, is attributed to Gongsun Shu, who rebelled in Sichuan in AD 25, and issued iron coins, two being equal to one Jian Wu Wu Zhu().
The Si Chu Wu Zhu () has four lines on reverse radiating from the corners of the hole.
Shu Wu Zhu () coins have the word Chuan () on the obverse, or the numbers 1-32 on the reverse, in incuse characters.
Shen Lang Wu Zhu () has no jin component in zhu.
Dang Liang Wu Zhu () is a large thick coin, with a nominal weight of 8 zhu.
Tian Jian Wu Zhu has an inner rim on obverse.
Nu Qian () have no outer rim.
An iron Wu Zhu with four lines radiating from the corners of the hole on the reverse.
Liang Zhu Wu Zhu () has a dot above and below the hole on the obverse.
Si Zhu Wu Zhu () have two dots on the obverse and reverse.
Yong Ping Wu Zhu () have characters long and thin.
Da Tong Wu Zhu () have a stout outer rim, inner rim only by the wu.
Western Wei Wu Zhu () have crossing lines of wu straight.
Sui Wu Zhu () is hourglass wu, inner rim by the wu only.
Bai Qian Wu Zhu () has writing as above.
Yan Huan Wu Zhu () is a Wu Zhu whose middle has been cut out to make two coins.
Zao Bian Wu Zhu () is the inner portion of a Wu Zhu whose outer portion has gone to make a thread ring.
E Yan () or Ji Mu () are the names given to various diminutive Wu Zhu coins.
Small coins with no characters.
In 220, the Han Dynasty came to an end, and was followed by a long period of disunity and civil war, beginning with the Three Kingdoms period, which developed from the divisions within the Han Dynasty.
This state only issued Wu Zhu coins.
Zhi Bai Wu Zhu () Often found with incuse characters on the reverse.
In the 1860s, a jar of small "goose eye" coins was dug up in Chengdu in Sichuan.
According to the records, in 236 Sun Quan, ruler of Wu, cast the Da Quan Wu Bai, and in 238 the Da Quan Dang Qian coins.
In 960, General Zhao Kuangyin had the throne thrust upon him by mutinous officers.
With so much official coinage available, private coining was generally not a serious problem.
A wide variety of ordinary cash coin types was produced.
A feature of Northern Song coinage is the sets of dui qian ().
From the beginning of the dynasty, iron coins were extensively used in present-day Sichuan and Shaanxi where copper was not readily available.
During the Xining period (from 1068), minting was increased, and by the Yuanfeng period (from 1078) it was reported that there were nine iron coin mints, three in Sichuan and six in Shaanxi, producing over a million strings a year.
Tai Ping tong bao () (976-989).
No coins were issued with the Yong Xi and Duan Gong period titles (984-89).
Chun Hua yuan bao () (990-94).
Zhi Dao yuan bao () (995-97).
Xian Ping yuan bao () (998-1003).
Jing De yuan bao () (1004-07).
Xiang Fu yuan bao () (1008-16).
Xiang Fu tong bao () (1008-16).
Tian Xi tong bao () (1017-22).
No coins were produced with the Qian Xing period title, which only lasted one year, 1022 [REF].
Tian Sheng yuan bao () (1023-31).
Ming Dao yuan bao () (1032-33).
Jing You yuan bao () (1034-38).
Huang Song tong bao () (1039-54) use seal and regular script, and have many variations.
The histories say that the Huang Song coin was cast in Baoyuan 2 - 1039.
Kang Ding yuan bao () (1040).
Qing Li zhong bao () (1041-48).
Zhi He yuan bao () (1054-55).
Zhi He tong bao () (1054-55).
Jia You yuan bao () (1056-63).
The Ban Liang coins take their name from their two character inscription Ban Liang (), which means half a liang.
These coins were traditionally associated with Qin Shi Huang Di, the first Chinese Emperor, who united China in 221 BC.
Archaeological evidence now shows that the Ban Liang was first issued in the Warring States period by the State of Qin, possibly as early as 378 BC.
Kai Yuan Tong Bao () were the main coin issued by the Tang.
A crescent-shaped mark is often found on the reverse of Kai Yuans.
At first, mints were set up in Luoyang in Henan, and also in Peking, Chengdu, Bingzhou (Taiyuan in Shanxi), and then Guilin in Guangxi.
In 845, in the Huichang period, the Emperor Wu Zong, a fervent follower of Taoism, destroyed the Buddhist monasteries and used the copper bells, gongs, incense burners and statues to cast coins in various localities.
Archaeological discoveries have assisted numismatists in dating various varieties of the Kai Yuan more closely.
Qian Feng Quan Bao () were cast by the Emperor Gao Zong (649-83) in 666.
Qian Yuan zhong bao () were issued by Emperor Su Zong (756-62) to pay the army fighting against the rebels.
Judging by their find spots, these coin were cast by the local government in the Kuche area of Xinjiang in around 760-780.
Yuan () is similar to the above coin however it has only the character yuan included.
Jian Zhong tong bao () The Jian Zhong Period was 780-83.
Zhong () above the hole.
In 755, a revolt started in the north-west of China.
De Yi yuan bao () has the inscription De Yi, which also implies "last for one year".
Shun Tian yuan bao ()[REF] .
After the collapse of the Tang in 907, another period of disunity ensued known as the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period.
The south enjoyed somewhat better political and economic conditions, and saw an advance in trade.
Kai Ping tong bao () and also a Kai Ping yuan bao coins could have been issued by Zhu Wen when he overthrew the Tang in 907.
Tian Cheng yuan bao () were issued by Emperor Ming in the Tiancheng period (926-29).
Tian Fu yuan bao () were issued by Emperor Gao Zong in the Tianfu period from 938.
Han Yuan tong bao () coin's pattern is based on the Kai Yuan.
Zhou Yuan tong bao () coins were issued by Emperor Chai RongShi Zong from 955.
Issued by Wang Jian (907-18).
Issued by Wang Zongyan, son of Wang Jian (919-25).
Kai Yuan tong bao () have the character Min () on the reverse.
Kai Yuan tong bao () have the character Fu () on the reverse in reference to Fuzhou.
Qian Feng Quan Bao () are made of iron.
Qian Yuan zhong bao () bear an inscription that is also found on Tang coins.
Da Shu tong bao (Great Shu currency) () are attributed to Meng Zhixiang when he became Emperor Gao Zu of Shu in Chengdu in 934.
Guang Zheng tong bao () are made of bronze and iron.
Yong Tong Quan Huo () were produced after 959.
Tang Guo tong bao () are written in seal, li, and regular script.
Da Tang tong bao () are written in li script and date from 959.
Distinguished from Tang period Kai Yuan by the broader rims, and the characters being in less deep relief.
In the second year of Qiande (961), Li Yu ascended the throne, and the resources of the country being exhausted, his minister Han Xizai obtained permission to cast coins.
Da Qi tong bao () were said to have been cast in 937 by the Prince of Qi or by the founder of the Southern Tang with the original name of the Tang kingdom.
Kai Ping yuan bao () were made from lead.
Wu Wu, Wu Wu Wu, Wu Wu Wu Wu, Wu Zhu, and Kai Yuan Wu Wu coins are typical of the hybrid inscriptions formed by combinations of inappropriate characters.
Nearly all the coin hoards of this period are of lead coins found in towns, e.g. the Guangfu Road, Guangzhou hoard of 2,000 coins.
Recently a whole lot of inventions, purporting to belong to this series, have come on the market [REF].
From 822, the You Zhou (within modern Hebei) area enjoyed virtual independence from the rest of the empire.
Wu Zhu () are made from iron.
Inscriptions and archaeological evidence shows that cowrie shells were regarded as important objects of value in the Shang Dynasty (c.
Similar bronze pieces with inscriptions, known as Ant Nose Money () or Ghost Face Money () were definitely used as money.
The only minted gold of this period known is Chu Gold Block Money (), which consists of sheets of gold 3-5 mm thick, of various sizes, with inscriptions consisting of square or round stamps in which there are one or two characters.
It has been suggested that pieces of jade were a form of money in the Shang Dynasty [REF].
Metal money brands () were rarely used in the state of Chu [REF].
Hollow handled spades () are a link between weeding tools used for barter and stylised objects used as money.
These have lost the hollow handle of the early spades.
Knife Money is much the same shape as the actual knives in use during the Zhou period.
Two different shapes of Ming knife are found.
A wide range of characters is found on the reverses of Ming knives.
The round coin, the precursor of the familiar cash coin, circulated in both the spade and knife money areas in the Zhou period, from around 350 BC.
Although for discussion purposes the Zhou coins are divided up into categories of knives, spades, and round coins, it is apparent from archaeological finds that most of the various kinds circulated together.
Sima Yan founded the Jin Dynasty in AD 265, and after the defeat of Eastern Wu in 280, China was reunified for a while.
Liang Zao Xin Quan () is attributed to King Zhang Gui (317-376), who ruled in the north-western area.
Feng Huo () has text that uses Seal Script.
Han Xing () as an inscription either right and left or above and below.
Tai Xia Zhen Xing () counterwise.
The North and South Dynasties era was another long period of disunity and strife.
Si Zhu () No inner rims on obverse.
Tai Qing Feng Le () are attributed to the Tai Qing period (547-549) of Emperor Wu.
Tai Huo Liu Zhu () were issued by Emperor Xuan in 579.
Yong An Wu Zhu () coins were first issued in the autumn of the second year of Yongan (529) by Emperor Xiao Zhuang.
Chang Ping Wu Zhu () were cast by Emperor Wen Xuan in 553.
Bu Quan () were issued in 561 by Emperor Wu of the Northern Zhou dynasty.
Wu Xing Da Bu () were issued in 574 by Emperor Wu.
Yong Tong Wan Guo () were issued in 579 by Emperor Xuan.
The above coins, the "Northern Zhou Three Coins" are written in the Yu Zhu (Jade Chopstick) style of calligraphy which is greatly admired.
3 and 4 Zhu coins are a small group of square and round coins which do not always have a hole in the middle.
William remained in England after his coronation and tried to reconcile the native magnates.
While William was in Normandy, a former ally, Eustace, the Count of Boulogne, invaded at Dover but was repulsed.
In 1068 Edwin and Morcar revolted, supported by Gospatric.
Early in 1069, Edgar the Ætheling rose in revolt and attacked York.
While at Winchester in 1070, William met with three papal legates - John Minutus, Peter, and Ermenfrid of Sion - who had been sent by Pope Alexander.
Although Sweyn had promised to leave England, he returned in spring 1070, raiding along the Humber and East Anglia toward the Isle of Ely, where he joined up with Hereward the Wake, a local thegn.
In 1071 William defeated the last rebellion of the north.
William returned to England to release his army from service in 1073 but quickly returned to Normandy, where he spent all of 1074 [REF].
In 1075, during William's absence, Ralph de Gael, the Earl of Norfolk, and Roger de Breteuil, the Earl of Hereford, conspired to overthrow William in the "Revolt of the Earls" [REF].
The exact reason for the rebellion is unclear, but it was launched at the wedding of Ralph to a relative of Roger, held at Exning in Suffolk.
Earl Ralph had secured control of the castle at Dol, and in September 1076 William advanced into Brittany and laid siege to the castle.
In late 1077 or early 1078 trouble began between William and his eldest son, Robert.
Word of William's defeat at Gerberoi stirred up difficulties in northern England.
Sources for William's actions between 1082 and 1084 are meagre.
Maine continued to be difficult, with a rebellion by Hubert de Beaumont-au-Maine, probably in 1084.
William left England towards the end of 1086.
William left Normandy to Robert, and the custody of England was given to William's second surviving son, also called William, on the assumption that he would become king.
Disorder followed William's death
William's grave is currently marked by a marble slab with a Latin inscription dating from the early 19th century.
Norsemen first began raiding in what became Normandy in the late 8th century.
Danish raids on England continued, and Æthelred sought help from Richard, taking refuge in Normandy in 1013 when King Swein I of Denmark drove Æthelred and his family from England.
After Cnut's death in 1035 the English throne fell to Harold Harefoot, his son by his first wife, while Harthacnut, his son by Emma, became king in Denmark.
William was born in 1027 or 1028 at Falaise, Normandy, most likely towards the end of 1028 [REF].
Robert became Duke of Normandy on 6 August 1027, succeeding his elder brother Richard III, who had only succeeded to the title the previous year [REF].
There are indications that Robert may have been briefly betrothed to a daughter of King Cnut, but no marriage took place.
The anarchy in the duchy lasted until 1047,[REF] and control of the young duke was one of the priorities of those contending for power.
King Henry continued to support the young duke,[REF] but in late 1046 opponents of William came together in a rebellion centred in lower Normandy, led by Guy of Burgundy with support from Nigel, Viscount of the Cotentin, and Ranulf, Viscount of the Bessin.
William's next efforts were against Guy of Burgundy, who retreated to his castle at Brionne, which William besieged.
On the death of Hugh of Maine, Geoffrey Martel occupied Maine in a move contested by William and King Henry; eventually they succeeded in driving Geoffrey from the county, and in the process, William was able to secure the Bellême family strongholds at Alençon and Domfort for himself.
William met the invasion by dividing his forces into two groups.
One factor in William's favour was his marriage to Matilda of Flanders, the daughter of Count Baldwin V of Flanders.
No authentic portrait of William has been found
There are records of two tutors for the young duke during the late 1030s and early 1040s, but the extent of William's literary education is unclear.
Norman government under William was similar to the government that had existed under earlier dukes.
William cultivated close relations with the church in his duchy.
As part of his efforts to secure England, William ordered many castles, keeps, and mottes built - among them the central keep of the Tower of London, the White Tower.
At first, most of the newly settled Normans kept household knights and did not settle their retainers with fiefs of their own, but gradually these household knights came to be granted lands of their own, a process known as subinfeudation.
By William's death, after weathering a series of rebellions, most of the native Anglo-Saxon aristocracy had been replaced by Norman and other continental magnates.
The medieval chronicler William of Malmesbury says that the king also seized and depopulated many miles of land (36 parishes), turning it into the royal New Forest region to support his enthusiastic enjoyment of hunting.
After 1066, William did not attempt to integrate his separate domains into one unified realm with one set of laws.
William took over an English government that was more complex than the Norman system.
William continued the collection of danegeld, a land tax.
Besides taxation, William's large landholdings throughout England strengthened his rule.
At Christmas 1085, William ordered the compilation of a survey of the landholdings held by himself and by his vassals throughout the kingdom, organised by counties.
William and his wife Matilda of Flanders had at least nine children [REF].
Robert was born between 1051 and 1054, died 10 February 1134 [REF].
Richard was born before 1056, died around 1075 [REF].
William was born between 1056 and 1060, died 2 August 1100 [REF].
Henry was born in late 1068, died 1 December 1135 [REF].
Adeliza (or Adelida,[REF] Adelaide[REF]) died before 1113, reportedly betrothed to Harold II of England, probably a nun of Saint Léger at Préaux [REF].
Cecilia (or Cecily) was born before 1066, died 1127, Abbess of Holy Trinity, Caen [REF].
Matilda[REF][REF] was born around 1061, died perhaps about 1086 [REF].
Constance died 1090, married Alan IV Fergent, Duke of Brittany [REF].
Adela died 1137, married Stephen, Count of Blois [REF].
(Possibly) Agatha, the betrothed of Alfonso VI of León and Castile.
There is no evidence of any illegitimate children born to William [REF].
Harold was crowned on 6 January 1066 in Edward's new Norman-style Westminster Abbey, although some controversy surrounds who performed the ceremony.
Harold's brother Tostig made probing attacks along the southern coast of England in May 1066, landing at the Isle of Wight using a fleet supplied by Baldwin of Flanders.
William of Poitiers describes a council called by Duke William, in which the writer gives an account of a great debate that took place between William's nobles and supporters over whether to risk an invasion of England.
Throughout the summer, William assembled an army and an invasion fleet in Normandy.
Harold's brother Tostig and Harald Hardrada invaded Northumbria in September 1066 and defeated the local forces under Morcar and Edwin at the Battle of Fulford near York.
After defeating Harald Hardrada and Tostig, Harold left much of his army in the north, including Morcar and Edwin, and marched the rest south to deal with the threatened Norman invasion [REF].
The battle began at about 9 am on 14 October and lasted all day, but while a broad outline is known, the exact events are obscured by contradictory accounts in the sources [REF].
Harold's body was identified the day after the battle, either through his armour or marks on his body.
William may have hoped the English would surrender following his victory, but they did not.
The immediate consequence of William's death was a war between his sons Robert and William over control of England and Normandy [REF].
The impact on England of William's conquest was profound; changes in the Church, aristocracy, culture, and language of the country have persisted into modern times.
William's reign has caused historical controversy since before his death.
In 1051 the childless King Edward of England appears to have chosen William as his successor to the English throne [REF].
Count Herbert II of Maine died in 1062, and William, who had betrothed his eldest son Robert to Herbert's sister Margaret, claimed the county through his son.
In 1065 Northumbria revolted against Tostig, and the rebels chose Morcar, the younger brother of Edwin, Earl of Mercia, as earl in place of Tostig.
During the final phase of the battle, Vukovar's remaining inhabitants, including several thousand Serbs, took refuge in cellars and communal bomb shelters, which housed up to 700 people each.
The hospital had to deal with hundreds of wounded people - between sixteen and eighty each day, three quarters of them civilians, in the second half of September [REF].
Croatian forces adapted several Antonov An-2 biplanes to drop supplies by parachute on Vukovar.
The European Community attempted to provide humanitarian aid to the 12,000 civilians trapped within the perimeter, but only one aid convoy made it through [REF].
On 16 October, the JNA mounted a major attack against Borovo Naselje.
On 2 November, the JNA reached the strategic suburb of Lužac, between Borovo Naselje and Vukovar, cutting one of the two roads linking the town centre with its northern suburb [REF].
JNA troops launched an amphibious assault across the Danube north of Lužac on 3 November to link up with Arkan's paramilitary "Tigers".
By now, the defenders were running out of ammunition and were exhausted from fighting around the clock without any prospect of being relieved or replacing their dead and wounded [REF].
Many of Vukovar's civilian inhabitants were living in squalid conditions and nearing starvation.
By early October, there were no cigarettes.
When the battle ended, the scale of the destruction came as a shock to many who not been out of their shelters in weeks.
The picture of Vukovar at the 22nd hour of the 87th day [of the siege] will stay forever in the memory of those who witnessed it.
Although the fighting was over in the centre of Vukovar, sporadic combat continued for several more days elsewhere in the shattered town.
Only soldiers of the Serbian-dominated army, stray dogs and a few journalists walked the smoky, rubble-choked streets amid the ruins of the apartment buildings, stores and hotel in Vukovar's center.
Laura Silber and the BBC's Allan Little described how "corpses of people and animals littered the streets.
The colonels who ran "Operation Vukovar" entertained more than 100 journalists inside the ruins of the Dunav Hotel at a kind of Mad Hatter's victory celebration.
Many of those captured in Vukovar, both soldiers and civilians, were killed.
After Vukovar fell, people were lined up and made to walk to detention areas.
Around 400 people from Vukovar's hospital - non-Serb patients, medical personnel, local political figures and others who had taken refuge there - were taken by the JNA.
Detainees who were not suspected of involvement with the Croatian armed forces were evacuated from Vukovar to other locations in Serbia and Croatia [REF].
Serb forces singled out a number of prominent individuals.
Vukovar was systematically looted after its capture.
Three JNA officers, Mile Mrkšić; Veselin Šljivančanin; and Miroslav Radić, were indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on multiple counts of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws of war, having surrendered or been captured during 2002 and 2003.
Serbian paramilitary leader Vojislav Šešelj was indicted on war crimes charges, including several counts of extermination, for the Vukovar hospital massacre, in which his "White Eagles" were allegedly involved [REF].
The ICTY indictment of Slobodan Milošević characterised the overall JNA and Serb offensive in Croatia - including the fighting in eastern Slavonia - as a "joint criminal enterprise" to remove non-Serb populations from Serb-inhabited areas of Croatia.
Croatian courts indicted Veljko Kadijević and Blagoje Adžić, former commanders of the Yugoslav Army, for war crimes in Vukovar [REF].
In 1999, Croatia sued Yugoslavia before the International Court of Justice (ICJ), claiming genocide had been committed in Vukovar.
By the end of July 1991, an improvised Croatian defence force in Vukovar was almost surrounded by Serbian militias in the neighbouring villages.
The Croatian force in Vukovar comprised 1,800 men assembled from units of the newly created Croatian National Guard, including 400 members of the 3rd Guards Brigade and the 1st Guards Brigade.
Volunteers arrived from other parts of Croatia, including 58 members of the far-right paramilitary Croatian Defence Forces (HOS) backed by Dobroslav Paraga's extreme nationalist Croatian Party of Rights (HSP) [REF].
The Croatian force in Vukovar was commanded by Mile Dedaković, a former JNA officer who had joined the ZNG.
At the start of the battle, they were poorly armed and many were equipped only with hunting rifles.
The attacking force included JNA soldiers conscripted from across Yugoslavia, members of the TO, Chetniks (Serbian nationalist paramilitaries), local Serb militiamen and units of the Yugoslav Navy and the Yugoslav Air Force [REF].
Although the battle was fought primarily by the federal Yugoslav military, the government of Serbia was directly involved.
At the start of the war in Slovenia, the army still saw itself as the defender of a federal, communist Yugoslavia, rather than an instrument of Serbian nationalism.
The loss of Slovenia in the Ten-Day War made it impossible to fulfil the original objective of keeping Yugoslavia intact.
Yugoslav and Serb propaganda portrayed Croatian separatists as genocidal Ustaše, who had illegally taken over Yugoslav territory and were threatening Serb civilians in a reprise of the anti-Serb pogroms of the Second World War [REF].
The Croatian government attacked JNA garrisons and arms depots throughout the country on 14 September - an offensive dubbed the Battle of the Barracks.
The JNA responded by launching a major offensive in eastern Slavonia, from where it intended to progress west via Vinkovci and Osijek to Zagreb.
On 19 September, a JNA force consisting of at least 100 T-55 and M-84 tanks with armoured personnel carriers and heavy artillery pieces left Belgrade.
The JNA launched repeated assaults on Vukovar but failed to make any progress.
Croatian forces countered the JNA's attacks by mining approach roads, sending out mobile teams equipped with anti-tank weapons, deploying many snipers, and fighting back from heavily fortified positions [REF].
The JNA began launching artillery and rocket barrages against the town.
The JNA's lack of infantry support was due to a disastrously low level of mobilisation in the preceding months.
Morale on the battlefield was poor.
In late September, Lieutenant Colonel General Života Panić was put in charge of the operation against Vukovar.
The greatest credit for this goes to Arkan's volunteers!
Panić combined well-motivated paramilitary infantry with trained engineering units to clear mines and defensive positions, supported by heavy armour and artillery [REF].
Vukovar is an important regional centre on Croatia's eastern border, situated in eastern Slavonia on the west bank of the Danube river.
The region underwent major demographic changes following the Second World War, when its ethnic German inhabitants were expelled and replaced with settlers from elsewhere in Yugoslavia [REF].
From 1945, the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was governed as a federal socialist state comprising six newly created republics - Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro and Macedonia [REF].
After Yugoslavia's leader Josip Broz Tito died in 1980, long-suppressed ethnic nationalism revived and the individual republics began to assert their authority more strongly as the federal government weakened.
Tuđman's programme was opposed by many members of Croatia's Serb minority, towards whom he was overtly antagonistic [REF].
Vukovar suffered catastrophic damage in the battle.
a silent, ghostly landscape, consisting of mile upon mile of bricks, rusting cars, collapsed roofs, telegraph poles and timber beams poking out from the rubble.
Such law and order as there is administered by warlords.
The population increased to about 20,000 as Serb refugees from other parts of Croatia and Bosnia were relocated by RSK authorities.
After the Erdut Agreement was signed in 1995, the United Nations Transitional Authority for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) was established to enable the return of Croatian refugees and to prepare the region for reintegration into Croatia.
Although the Croatian government sponsored reconstruction efforts in and around Vukovar, the Serb-populated town centre remained in ruins until 2003.
Signs of the battle are still widely apparent in Vukovar, where many buildings remain visibly scarred by bullets and shrapnel.
Every November, Vukovar's authorities hold four days of festivities to commemorate the fall of the town, culminating in a "Procession of Memory" held on 18 November.
Local Serbs have avoided participating in the Croatian commemorations, often preferring either to leave the town or stay indoors on 18 November.
The issue of how to remember the Serbian dead has posed particular difficulties.
Vukovar Serbs report feeling marginalised and excluded from places associated with Croatian nationalist sentiment, such as monuments to the Croatian defenders.
The battle is widely commemorated across Croatia.
In November 2010, Boris Tadić became the first President of Serbia to travel to Vukovar, when he visited the massacre site at Ovčara and expressed his "apology and regret" [REF].
The conflict between Serbs and Croats spread to eastern Slavonia in early 1991.
Shortly after, Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) units moved into Borovo Selo.
On 19 May 1991, the Croatian government held a nationwide referendum on a declaration of sovereignty.
Violence in and around Vukovar worsened after the independence referendum.
The conflict blurred ethnic lines.
Croatia suffered heavy military and civilian casualties.
Although JNA losses were undoubtedly substantial, the exact numbers are unclear because of a lack of official data.
Serbian sources disagree with this assessment.
The Serbian and Croatian media waged a fierce propaganda battle over the progress and reasons for the battle.
Victim status became a central aim for the propaganda machines of both sides, and the battle was used to support claims of atrocities.
Such victim-centred propaganda had a powerful motivating effect.
The international community made repeated unsuccessful attempts to end the fighting.
International observers tried unsuccessfully to prevent the human rights abuses that followed the battle.
There was no international media presence in Vukovar, as there was in the simultaneous Siege of Dubrovnik and the later Siege of Sarajevo, and relatively little of the fighting in Vukovar was broadcast to foreign audiences.
The Croatian media gave heavy coverage to the battle, repeatedly airing broadcasts from the besieged town by the journalist Siniša Glavašević.
The Croatian government was criticised for its approach to the battle [REF].
From a military point of view, the outcome at Vukovar was not a disaster for Croatia's overall war effort.
Following the battle, Vukovar became a symbol of Croatian resistance and suffering.
The ruling HDZ made extensive use of popular culture relating to Vukovar as propaganda in the years before the region was reintegrated into Croatia [REF].
Our arrival in Vukovar - the symbol of Croatian suffering, Croatian resistance, Croatian aspirations for freedom, Croatian desire to return to its eastern borders on the Danube, of which the Croatian national anthem sings - is a sign of our determination to really achieve peace and reconciliation [REF].
Although the battle had been fought in the name of Serbian defence and unity, reactions in Serbia were deeply divided.
The Serbian geographer Jovan Ilić set out a vision for the future of the region, envisaging it being annexed to Serbia and its expelled Croatian population being replaced with Serbs from elsewhere in Croatia.
The Croatian Serb leadership also took a positive view of the outcome.
In contrast, many in Serbia were strongly opposed to the battle and the wider war, and resisted efforts by the state to involve them in the conflict.
I cannot applaud the Vukovar victory, which is so euphorically celebrated in the war propaganda of intoxicated Serbia.
By late December 1991, just over a month after victory had been proclaimed in Vukovar, opinion polls found that 64 percent wanted to end the war immediately and only 27 percent were willing to continue the war.
Although the battle was publicly portrayed as a triumph, behind the scenes it profoundly affected the JNA's character and leadership.
Many individual JNA soldiers who took part in the battle were revolted by what they had seen and protested to their superiors about the behaviour of the paramilitaries.
I was in the Army and I did my duty.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, President Alija Izetbegović made a televised appeal to Bosnian citizens to refuse the draft on the grounds that "this is not our war".
Macedonia's parliament adopted a declaration of independence from Yugoslavia in January 1991, but it did not take effect until a referendum in September 1991 confirmed it.
There are several key ministries that focus on different aspect of the larger mission statement.
Nazarene Youth International is a youth organisation that has partnered with the Church of the Nazarene since its inception as the Nazarene Young Peoples Society (NYPS) in 1923.
The NYI-sponsored Third Wave emerging leadership conference was held from January 3-8, 2012 in Bangkok, Thailand, with approximately 250 participants from 55 countries attending [REF].
At the end of 2010, Sunday School and Discipleship Ministries International (SDMI) reported an average global Sunday School weekly attendance of 703,344,[REF] and the Global Discipleship Group attendance was 191,912, for a total of 895,256 (an increase of 52,132 from 2009) [REF].
The Church of the Nazarene has been committed to obeying the Great Commission since its inception.
Nazarene Missions International (NMI) was founded in 1915 at the fourth General Assembly, as the Nazarene Foreign Missionary Society, with Susan Norris Fitkin, wife of financier Abram Fitkin, elected the first president.
From a peak of $54 million given for the World Evangelism Fund (WEF) in 2002,[REF] as a consequence of the Late-2000s financial crisis, the total amount raised for the World Evangelism Fund in 2012 was approximately US$38.3 million (a decrease of $0.5 million from the previous year) [REF].
The Church of the Nazarene is an active participant in the Jesus Film Project, organizing teams to show the Jesus film.
Since its inception in 1974, Work and Witness, an endeavor that sends teams of volunteers into cross-cultural situations primarily to construct buildings on the mission field, has 196,060 participants who have given 13,246,196 labor hours, which equals 6,564 years of labor.
The Church of the Nazarene has 245 full-time compassionate ministries centers and volunteer efforts around the world [REF].
Nazarene Publishing House (NPH), the publishing arm of the Church of the Nazarene, is the largest publisher of Wesleyan-Holiness literature in the world [REF].
NPH is a separate corporate entity from General Church of the Nazarene, although it is accountable to the church.
Music and drama resources are published under the label Lillenas Publishing, which was founded in Indianapolis, Indiana in 1925 by Nazarene minister and composer Haldor Lillenas (born November 19, 1885 at Stord Island, Norway; died August 18, 1959 at Aspen, Colorado),[REF] and subsequently purchased by NPH[REF] in 1930 [REF].
The denomination inherited its current name from the one of its primary antecedent groups, the Los Angeles, California based Church of the Nazarene founded in October 1895 by Dr. Phineas F. Bresee and Dr.
Consequently, the denominational name focuses on Jesus as "The Nazarene".
In 1895 the name of the denomination was first recommended by Dr.
The denomination started as a church that ministered to the homeless and poor, and wanted to keep that attitude of ministering to "lower classes" of society.
At the First General Assembly that united Bresee's denomination with the Association of Pentecostal Churches of America in October 1907, the denominational name that emerged was the Pentecostal Church of the Nazarene, reflecting the ancestry of both denominational tributaries.
The term "Pentecostal" in the church's original name soon proved to be increasingly problematic.
While there is no official theology text authorised by the denomination, there are several that have been widely used in the pre-ordination training course for ministers.
The Church of the Nazarene stands in the Arminian tradition of free grace for all and human freedom to choose to partake of that saving grace.
Both the doctrines of entire sanctification and prevenient grace are usually interpreted in less rigid fashion by most church members, viewing spiritual perfection as something to strive toward, being already sanctified and forgiven for their sins under the sacrifice of Christ.
In recent years, Nazarene theologians have increasingly understood the movement's distinctive theological doctrine, entire sanctification, as best understood in terms of love.
The spiritual vision of early Nazarenes was derived from the doctrinal core of John Wesley's preaching and the holiness movement of the 19th century.
Prevenient grace, or the grace that "goes before" us, is given to all people.
Justifying Grace or Accepting Grace[REF] is that grace, offered by God to all people, that we receive by faith and trust in Christ, through which God pardons the believer of sin.
Wesleyan theology maintains that salvation is the act of God's grace entirely, from invitation, to pardon, to growth in holiness.
For Wesley, good works were the fruit of one's salvation, not the way in which that salvation was earned.
A key outgrowth of this theology is the commitment of Nazarenes not only to the Evangelical Gospel of repentance and a personal relationship with God, but also to compassionate ministry to the poor.
The Church of the Nazarene also takes a stance on a wide array of current moral and social issues, which is published in the Manual and online.
Consistent with the position of classical Nazarene theologian H. Orton Wiley, several contemporary Nazarene theologians, including Thomas Jay Oord, Michael Lodahl, and Samuel M. Powell, have endeavored to reconcile the theory of evolution with theology.
Throughout its history, the Church of the Nazarene has maintained a stance supporting total abstinence from alcohol and any other intoxicant, including cigarettes.
The basic unit of organization in the Church of the Nazarene is the local church congregation, which may be either an organized church or church-type mission (often known as "New Starts").
Local congregations are grouped administratively into geographical Districts.
Districts may also be divided into several Zones or missional networks, where local churches within a Zone may cooperate for various activities, particularly for youth events.
All Districts of the Church of the Nazarene are organized into Regions.
The regions are administered through Nazarene Global Mission, an entity formed in 2011 after a strategic restructuring that incorporates all functions of the former World Mission Department.
In the United States and Canada, there are educational zones centered on one of the denominational institutions of higher education.
Districts in areas administered by the Global Mission are often grouped into "fields", with a field strategy co-ordinator providing strategic leadership.
The following are notable people who have past or current affiliation or membership in the Church of the Nazarene.
South African politician Rev. William Bantom (born ca.
Notable Nazarene historians include Timothy L. Smith, Stan Ingersol, Floyd T. Cunningham, Paul M. Bassett, and Randall J. Stephens.
Four-time governor of Louisiana Edwin Edwards (born 1927) early in life was a Nazarene preacher before converting to Roman Catholicism.
Japanese graphic designer, set designer, essayist and novelist Kappa Senoo, (1930-) grew up in a Nazarene family in Kobe, Japan before and during WWII.
Annual revival meetings have long been a traditional part of Nazarene life, and are still encouraged in the Manual, though may be seen less today than they once were.
A distinct approach to worship, especially in the early days of the Nazarene church, was the belief that ultimately the Holy Spirit should lead the worship.
While Nazarenes believe that the ill should utilize all appropriate medical agencies, Nazarenes also affirm God's will of divine healing and pastors may "lay hands" upon the ill in prayer, either at the hospital or in a worship service.
Every Nazarene church is required to administer the sacrament of the Lord's Supper at least four times a year [REF].
Nazarenes permit both believer's baptism and infant baptism.
The Nazarene Manual includes rituals for the believer's baptism, infant baptism, infant dedication, reception of new church members, communion, weddings, funerals, the organization of a local church, the installation of new officers, and church dedications [REF].
The Church of the Nazarene combines episcopal and congregational polities[REF] to form a "representative" government [REF].
According to the denominational website, "The General Assembly of the church serves as the supreme doctrine-formulating, lawmaking, and elective authority of the Church of the Nazarene, subject to the provisions of the church constitution."
The highest elected office in the Church of the Nazarene is that of General Superintendent.
Collectively these six elders constitute the Board of General Superintendents, which is, according to the denominational website, "charged with the responsibility of administering the worldwide work of the Church of the Nazarene.
The General Board of the Church of the Nazarene was created by action of the 1923 General Assembly to replace a system of independent general boards that often competed with one another for the church dollar.
At the June 2013 General Assembly a new General Board was elected to a four-year term.
The Church of the Nazarene also recognizes these specialized forms of Christian service and ministry [REF].
Under the policy, foreign districts would be granted the same rights as US districts, with control passing from missionaries to local leaders [REF].
Gailey indicates, that by 1932 these policy statements had been broadened to full "three-self" language, with the instruction to missionaries to cultivate among local Christians "self support, self leadership and responsibility for the propagation of the gospel in that field."[REF]
According to one denominational historian, W.T. Purkiser, the process of "internationalizing" the church began at the General Assembly in Portland, Oregon in 1964 with an eight-year study of the church's total missionary program."[REF]
In 1973 Phillips died, and was succeeded by former missionary to Germany Jerald Johnson (born 1916).
At the 1980 General Assembly held in Kansas City, the denomination formally committed itself to the process of internationalization, a deliberate policy of being one church of congregations and districts worldwide, rather than splitting into national churches like earlier Protestant denominations.
After the election of Jerald Johnson as a general superintendent in June 1980, the General Board elected L. Guy Nees as his replacement [REF].
In 1999 incoming professor of missions at Nazarene Theological Seminary Mario Zani indicated that the biblical concept of koinonia, the fellowship "that transcended any differences, assignments, or titles", should be the basis of the development of the Church of the Nazarene.
By the 2001 General Assembly, held in Indianapolis, 42 percent of delegates present and voting were not native English speakers.
For the quadrennium that started in July 2009, the General Board had 44 members representing the church's then 15 regions, and an additional four members who were elected to represent Education (2), Nazarene Youth International, and Nazarene Missions International.
The Church of the Nazarene is the product of a series of mergers that occurred between various holiness churches, associations and denominations throughout the 20th century [REF].
The First General Assembly held in Chicago, Illinois from October 10-17, 1907 brought together the Eastern and the Western streams.
At the Second General Assembly held at Pilot Point, Texas, the Holiness Church of Christ (located in the southern United States) merged with the Pentecostal Nazarenes.
Other independent bodies joined at later dates, including the Pentecostal Church of Scotland (founded in 1909 by Rev. George Sharpe) and the Pentecostal Mission (founded in 1898 by J.O. McClurkan), both in 1915.
The 2009 General Assembly authorized a committee with "the responsibility to approach "like-minded churches in the Wesleyan-Holiness tradition in order to pursue closer relations, with a goal of exploring the possibility of a merger or a collaborative relationship."[REF] .
Throughout its history, there have been several groups that separated from the Church of the Nazarene to form new denominations.
Even before the merger of October 1908, the parental bodies of the Church of the Nazarene had a vision to be an international denomination.
At the time of the 50th anniversary of the denomination in October 1958, a total of 19.8% of all Nazarenes lived outside the continental United States [REF].
In 2017, the church was located in 162 "world areas" (approximately equivalent to nations) [REF].
Each week Nazarenes worship in more than 212 languages or tribal languages, with literature produced in 90 of these [REF].
Based on "reporting received from districts for assemblies held October 1, 2015, through September 30, 2016", at the end of September 2016 the Church of the Nazarene had 2,471,553 total members (a net increase of 30,181 or 1.24 percent gain from the previous year) [REF].
With 27.29% of the Nazarene population, for the first time Africa was the largest of the denomination's 6 global regions, with a total of 674,414 members reported (an increase of 27,370 members since 2015; and an increase of 355,072 since 2006).
According to Nazarene Research Services, from 1983 to 2013, Church of the Nazarene membership grew from 650,000 full members to more than 2 million [REF].
During 2016 an average of 1,503,872 people attended worship services in the Church of the Nazarene around the world each week (an decrease of 5,390 people from the previous year) [REF].
During 2016, Nazarene churches received annual income from all sources of US$860,949,037, a decrease of US$941,336 from 2015, and a 3.79% decadal decrease from the US$894,866,142 reported in September 2006.
Throughout his life Yan Xishan attempted to identify, formulate, and disseminate a comprehensive ideology that would improve the morale and loyalty of his officials and the people of Shanxi.
Yan was emotionally attached to Confucianism by virtue of his upbringing, and because he identified its values as a historically effective solution to the chaos and disorder of his time.
Yan's interpretations of Confucianism were mostly borrowed from the form of Neo-Confucianism that was popular in the Qing dynasty.
Yan attributed much of the West's vitality to Christianity, and believed that China could only resist and overtake the West by generating an ideological tradition that was equally inspiring.
Yan deliberately organized many features of his Heart-Washing Society on the Christian church, including ending each service with hymns praising Confucius.
In 1911 Yan came to power in Shanxi as a disciple of Chinese Nationalism, but subsequently came to view Nationalism as merely another set of ideas which could be used to achieve his own objectives.
Yan attempted to moderate some aspects of Sun Yat-sen's ideology that he viewed as potentially threatening to his rule.
After the Kuomintang succeeded in forming a nominal central government in 1930, Yan encouraged Nationalist principles that he viewed as socially beneficial.
In 1931 Yan returned from his exile in Dalian impressed with the apparent successes of the Soviet Union's first Five-year plan, and attempted to reorganize the economy of Shanxi using Soviet methods, according to a local "Ten Year Plan" that Yan himself developed [REF].
Yan's speeches after 1931 reflect an interpretation of Marxian economics (mostly drawn from Das Kapital) that Yan gained while in exile in Dalian.
Like Marx, Yan wanted to eliminate what he saw as unearned profit by restructuring Shanxi's economy to reward only those who worked.
Yan interpreted Roosevelt's New Deal as promoting socialism in order to combat the spread of communism.
In spite of his efforts, Yan did not succeed in making Yan Xishan Thought widely popular in Shanxi, and most of his subjects refused to believe that his true objectives differed substantially from those of past regimes.
Yan did not come into serious conflict with the Japanese until the early 1930s.
In December 1931 Yan was warned that, after taking control of Manchuria, the Japanese would attempt to take control of Inner Mongolia by subverting Chinese authority in Chahar and Suiyuan.
The Japanese began promoting "autonomy" for northern China in the summer of 1935.
Although Yan admired its philosophy and economic methods, he feared the threat posed by Chinese communists almost as much as the Japanese.
These reforms did not prevent the spread of Communist guerrilla operations into Shanxi.
In March 1936, Manchukuo troops occupying the Inner Mongolian province of Chahar invaded northeastern Suiyuan, which Yan controlled.
In anticipation of this war, Japanese spies destroyed a large supply depot in Datong and carried out other acts of sabotage.
During the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945), most regions of Shanxi were quickly overrun by the Japanese, but Yan refused to flee the province even after losing the provincial capital, Taiyuan.
Yan, under the slogan "resistance against the enemy and defense of the soil" attempted to recruit young, patriotic intellectuals to his government in order to organize a local resistance to the threat of Japanese invasion.
In July 1937, after the Marco Polo Bridge Incident provoked the Japanese into attacking Chinese forces in and around Beijing, the Japanese sent a large number of warplanes and Manchurian soldiers to reinforce Prince De's army.
After returning to Shanxi, Yan encouraged his officials to be suspicious of enemy spies and hanjian, and ordered his forces to attack Prince De's forces in northern Chahar, hoping to surprise and overwhelm them quickly.
As the Japanese advanced southward into Taiyuan Basin, Yan attempted to impose discipline on his army by executing General Li Fuying and other officers guilty of retreating from the enemy.
When it became clear to Yan that his forces may not be successful in repelling the Japanese army, Yan invited Communist military forces to re-enter Shanxi.
Genuine Communist efforts to resist the Japanese gave them the authority to carry out sweeping and radical social and economic reforms, mostly related to land and wealth redistribution, which they defended by labeling those who resisted as hanjian.
By executing commanders guilty of retreating, Yan succeeded in improving the morale of his forces.
During the Battle of Xinkou, the Chinese defenders resisted the efforts of Japan's elite Itakagi Division for over a month, despite Japanese advantages in artillery and air support.
The Japanese suffered 30,000 dead and an equal number wounded in their effort to take northern Shanxi.
Shortly before losing Taiyuan Yan moved his headquarters to Linfen, in southwestern Shanxi.
Yan's intransigence obliged the Japanese to invade Linfen.
In the spring of 1938 the Japanese redistributed many of their forces away from Shanxi, and Yan succeeded in re-establishing his authority, setting up a headquarters in the remote, mountainous district of Qixian.
Yan's alliance with the Communists eventually suffered as tensions escalated between the KMT and CCP in other parts of China.
In 1940 Yan's friend, Ryūkichi Tanaka, became chief of staff of the Japanese First Army, which was stationed in Shanxi.
In May 1941 Tanaka returned to Shanxi and reopened negotiations with Yan, despite a general resistance from other Japanese military leaders in North China.
When Iwamatsu sent his chief of staff, Colonel Tadashi Hanaya to Qixian for the purpose of delivering what Yan demanded, Yan called the Japanese concessions inadequate and refused to negotiate with the Japanese.
After 1943 the Japanese began to negotiate with Yan clandestinely through civilian representatives (notably Yan's friend, Daisaku Komoto) in an effort to avoid being humiliated by him.
After the surrender of Japan and the end of the Second World War, Yan Xishan was notable for his ability to recruit thousands of Japanese soldiers stationed in northwest Shanxi in 1945, including their commanding officers, into his army.
Yan was successful in keeping the presence of the Japanese from American and Nationalist observers.
By recruiting the Japanese into his service in the manner that he did, Yan retained both the extensive industrial complex around Taiyuan and virtually all of the managerial and technical personnel employed by the Japanese to run it.
In Shanxi, Yan implemented numerous successful reforms in an effort to centralize his control over the province.
Yan attempted to develop his army as a locally recruited force which cultivated a public image of being servants, rather than masters, of the people.
When Yan returned from Japan in 1909 he was a firm proponent of militarism, and proposed a system of national conscription along German and Japanese lines.
Yan attempted, via conscription, to create a civilian reserve that would become the foundation of society in Shanxi.
Yan's officer corps was drawn from Shanxi's gentry, and given two years of education at government expense.
Yan went to great lengths to eradicate social traditions which he considered antiquated.
Yan attempted to eradicate the custom of foot binding, threatening to sentence men who married women with bound feet, and mothers who bound their daughters' feet, to hard labour in state-run factories.
In 1916 at least 10% of Shanxi's eleven million people were addicted to opium, and Yan attempted to eradicate opium use in Shanxi after he came to power.
Yan's attempts to suppress the opium trade in Shanxi were largely successful, and the number of opium addicts in the province was reduced by 80% by 1922.
Yan's efforts to stimulate Shanxi's economy mostly consisted of state-led investment in a broad variety of industries, and he generally failed to encourage private investment and trade.
After the civil war, Yan, like most Nationalist generals who did not switch sides, was demonized by Communist propaganda [REF].
Yan was sincere about his attempts to modernize Shanxi, and achieved success in some regards.
Although Yan constantly spoke of the desirability and need for reforms, until the 1930s he remained too conservative to implement anything resembling the kind of reforms needed to successfully modernize Shanxi.
Yan Xishan was born in the late Qing Dynasty in Wutai County, Xinzhou, Shanxi to a family which had been bankers and merchants for generations (Shanxi was known for its many successful banks until the late 19th century).
Over the five years that Yan studied in Japan he became impressed by Japan's efforts to successfully modernize.
Yan eventually concluded that the Japanese had successfully modernized largely due to the Japanese government's abilities to mobilize its populace in support of its policies, and due to the close, respectful relationship that existed between the Japanese military and civilian populations.
When he returned to China in 1909, Yan was assigned to be a division commander of the New Army in Shanxi,[REF] but secretly worked to overthrow the Qing [REF].
After the Second World War, Yan's troops (including thousands of former Japanese troops) held out against the Communists during the Chinese Civil War for four years.
The Shangdang Campaign was the first battle between Communist and KMT forces after World War II.
The initial skirmishes of the campaign were fought on August 19, 1945, when Yan dispatched 16,000 troops under Shi Zebo to capture the city of Changzhi, in southeast Shanxi.
After it became clear that Liu's forces were in danger of being defeated, Yan sent 20,000 more troops, commanded by Peng Yubin, to reinforce Shi and break the siege.
Peng was initially successful in defeating PLA detachments, but eventually his forces were led into an ambush.
Although both forces suffered the same amount of dead or wounded, 4,000-5,000, the Communists were able to capture 31,000 of Yan's troops, who surrendered once they fell into these ambushes.
The Shangdang Campaign ended with the Communists in firm control of southern Shanxi.
In 1946 Communist forces in Northwest China identified the capture of Yan's capital of Taiyuan as one of their main objectives, and throughout 1946 and 1947 Yan was constantly involved in efforts to defend the north and retake the south [REF].
By 1948, Yan's forces had suffered a succession of serious military defeats by the PLA, losing control of southern and central Shanxi, and were surrounded on all sides by territory controlled by the Communists.
To overcome these defenses, the Communist commander Xu Xiangqian developed a strategy of engaging positions on the outskirts of Taiyuan before besieging the city itself.
By November 13, 1948, the Communists succeeded in taking the area around the eastern side of Taiyuan.
Between November, 1948, and April, 1949, a stalemate was reached and there was little advancement by either side.
After major PLA victories in Hebei in late January, 1949, Communist armies in Shanxi were reinforced with additional troops and artillery.
Yan Xishan himself (along with most of the provincial treasury) was airlifted out of Taiyuan on March 1949 for the express purpose of asking the central government for more supplies.
Shortly after Yan himself was airlifted out of Taiyuan, Nationalist planes stopped dropping food and supplies for the defenders due to fears of being shot down by the advancing Communists [REF].
The fall of Taiyuan was one of the few examples in the Chinese Civil War in which Nationalist forces echoed the defeated Ming loyalists who had, in the 17th century, brought entire cities to ruins resisting the invading Manchus.
In March 1949 Yan flew to the capital of Nanjing for the purpose of asking the central government for more food and ammunition, taking most of the provincial treasury with him, and did not return before Taiyuan fell to Communist forces.
Yan focused his efforts on attempting to promote greater cooperation between Li and Chiang.
By late 1949 the Nationalist's position had become desperate.
Yan's final years were filled with disappointment and sadness.
Yan was deserted by all but a handful of followers, and spent most of his remaining years writing books on philosophy, history, and contemporary events, which he frequently had translated into English [REF].
Yan died in Taiwan in May 24, 1960 [REF].
In 1911 Yan hoped to join forces with another prominent Shanxi revolutionary, Wu Luzhen, in order to undermine Yuan Shikai's control of north China, but these plans were aborted after Wu was assassinated [REF].
The determination of Shanxi to resist Manchu rule was a factor leading Yuan to believe that only the abolition of the Qing dynasty could bring peace to China and end the civil war.
By 1911, Shanxi was one of the poorest provinces in China.
Yan's determination to modernize Shanxi was mostly inspired from his experiences in Japan, but also by his experiences with foreign doctors and personnel who arrived in Shanxi in 1918 in order to help Yan suppress an epidemic which was ravaging the province.
In order to maintain Shanxi's neutrality and free it from serious military confrontations with rival warlords, Yan developed a strategy of shifting alliances between various warring cliques, inevitably joining only winning sides.
Yan's alliance with Chiang was interrupted the next year, in 1929, when Yan joined Chiang's enemies to establish an alternative national government in northern China.
The events between 1927 and 1931 are best explained as the strategies of warlords accustomed to the constantly shifting, chaotic alliances which had characterized Chinese politics since the breakdown of the central government a decade earlier.
Yan was only able to return to Shanxi through a complex effort of intrigue and politicking.
Yan remained in the background of Shanxi politics until the Nanjing government's failure to resist the Japanese takeover of Manchuria after the Mukden Incident gave Yan and his followers an opportunity to informally overthrow the Kuomintang in Shanxi.
After 1931, Yan continued to give nominal support to the Nanjing government while maintaining de facto control over Shanxi, alternatively cooperating and conflicting with Communist agents active in his province.
The financial relationship between Shanxi and the central government remained complicated.
The northern and southern parts of the state are hilly, while the central part is a fertile plain.
In the north lies the edge of the great Indo-Gangetic plain.
The central part of the state lies in the fertile upper basin of the Mahanadi river and its tributaries.
The Amrit Dhara Water fall, Koriya is a natural waterfall which originates from the Hasdo River.
The climate of Chhattisgarh is tropical.
The temperature varies between in summer and between during winter.
Chhattisgarh is primarily a rural state with only 20% of its population (around 5.1 million people in 2011) residing in urban areas.
According to the 2011 census, 93.25% of Chhattisgarh's population practiced Hinduism, while 2% followed Islam, 1% followed Christianity and smaller number followed Buddhism, Sikhism, Jainism or other religions [REF].
In order to bring about social reforms and with a view to discourage undesirable social practices, Chhattisgarh government has enacted the Chhattisgarh Tonhi Atyachar (Niwaran) Act, 2005 against witchery [REF].
Some sections of tribal population of Chhattisgarh state believe in witchcraft [REF].
As of 2010, they are still hounded out of villages on the basis of flimsy accusations by male village sorcerers paid to do so by villagers with personal agendas, such as property and goods acquisition [REF].
According to the human rights organization, Release International several Christians in Chhattisgarh have been attacked and killed by Hindu nationalists.
The official language of the state is Hindi and is used by non-rural population of the state.
In addition to Chhattisgarhi, there are several other languages spoken by the tribal people of the Bastar region, geographically equivalent to the former Bastar state, like Halbi, Gondi and Bhatri [REF].
Chhattisgarh has a high female-male sex ratio (991)[REF] ranking at the 5th position among other states of India.
The gender ratio (number of females per 1000 males) has been steadily declining over 20th century in Chhattisgarh.
Rural women, although poor, are independent, better organized, socially outspoken [REF].
Detailed information on aspects of women's status in Chhattisgarh can be found in 'A situational analysis of women and girls in Chhattisgarh' prepared in 2004 by the National Commission of Women, a statutory body belonging to government of India.
Chhattisgarh's gross state domestic product for 2010 is estimated at INR 60,079 crore in current prices.
Chhattisgarh State is ranked as the 17th largest tea production state in India.
Agriculture is counted as the chief economic occupation of the state.
The majority of the farmers are still practicing the traditional methods of cultivation, resulting in low growth rates and productivity.
Considering this and a very limited irrigated area, the productivity of not only rice but also other crops is low, hence the farmers are unable to obtain economic benefits from agriculture and it has remained as subsistence agriculture till now.
The main crops are rice, maize,[REF] kodo-kutki and other small millets and pulses (tuar[REF] and kulthi); oilseeds, such as groundnuts (peanuts), soybeans[REF] and sunflowers, are also grown.
In Chhattisgarh, rice, the main crop, is grown on about 77% of the net sown area.
In Chhattisgarh region about 22% of net cropped area was under irrigation as compared to 36.5% in Madhya Pradesh in 1998-99, whereas the average national irrigation was about 40%.
Chhattisgarh has a limited irrigation system, with dams and canals on some rivers.
A total of four major, 33 medium and 2199 minor irrigation projects have been completed and five major, 9 medium and 312 minor projects are under construction, as of 31 March 2006.
Chhattisgarh is one of the few states of India where the power sector is effectively developed.
The state has potential of 61,000 MW of additional thermal power in terms of availability of coal for more than 100 years and more than 2,500 MW hydel capacity.
The steel industry is one of the biggest heavy industries of Chhattisgarh.
The aluminium industry of Chhattisgarh was established by Bharat Aluminium Company Limited, which has a capacity of around one million tonnes each year [REF].
Forests occupy 41.33% of the total area (as per the latest report by the Indian Forest Service) and the rich forest resources include wood, tendu leaves, honey and lac.
Chhattisgarh is rich in minerals.
In recent years, Chhattisgarh is also getting exposure in information technology (IT) projects and consultancy.
Chhattisgarh's total exports were US$353.3 million in 2009-10.
According to the census of 2011, Chhattisgarh's literacy, the most basic indicator of education was at 71.04 percent.
Data from Census of India, 2011 [REF].
Bastar Vishwavidyalaya, is one of the new universities erected at the same time as Surguja university.
There are a number of premier professional institutes in the state of Chhattisgarh.
Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya is the Central University of the Chhattisgarh state.
As of 2011 Chhattisgarh state had a Human Development Index value of 0.358, the lowest of any Indian state.
Chhattisgarh has one of the lowest standard of living in India as per the Income Index (0.127) along with the states of Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Rajasthan.
Despite these ratings and rankings, we can consider Raipur, the capital of Chhattisgarh to be one of the most developing cities in India.
Chhattisgarh has an Education Index of 0.526 according to 2011 NHDR which is higher than that of the states of Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, although lower than the national average of 0.563.
With respect to literacy, the state fared just below the national average.
According to NSS (2007-08), the literacy rate for Scheduled Tribes (STs) and Scheduled Castes (SCs) was better than the corresponding national average.
Among the marginalized groups, STs are at the bottom of the rankings, further emphasizing the lack of social development in the state.
Health Index of Chhattisgarh is less than 0.49, one of the lowest in the country.
Despite different health related schemes and programmes, the health indicators such as percentage of women with BMI<18.5,
Chhattisgarh is one of the emerging states with relatively high growth rates of NSDP (8.2% vs. 7.1% All India over 2002-2008) and per capita NSDP(6.2% vs. 5.4% All India over 2002-2008).
The demographic profile shows that about 80 per cent of the total population lived in rural areas.
There are more than 13 million males and 12.9 million females in Chhattisgarh, which constitutes 2.11% of the country's population.
Chhattisgarh has a fairly high fertility rate (3.1) as compared to All India (2.6) and the replacement rate (2.1).
With the exception of the hilly states of the north-east, Chhattisgarh has one of highest shares of Scheduled Tribe (ST) populations within a state, accounting for about 10 per cent of the STs in India.
The incidence of poverty in Chhattisgarh is very high.
More than half of the rural STs and urban SCs are poor.
This indicates that the good economic performance in recent years has not percolated to this socially deprived group, which is reflected in their poor performance in human development indicators.
In terms of access to improved drinking water sources, at the aggregate level, Chhattisgarh fared better than the national average and the SCs of the state performed better than the corresponding national average.
The proportion of households with access to improved sources of drinking water in 2008-9 was 91%.
Sanitation facilities in the state are abysmally low with only about 27 per cent having toilet facilities, which is far below the all-India average of 44% [REF].
States with low sanitation coverage in 2001 that improved coverage by 4-10% points are [Chhattisgarh], Odisha, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.
Across states, it has been found that teledensity (telephone density) was below 10 per cent in 2010 for Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand, reflecting a lack of access to telephones in these relatively poorer states.
The road length per 100 km2 was less than the national average of per 100 km2 in Chhattisgarh.
There are several opinions as to the origin of the name Chhattisgarh, which in ancient times was known as Dakshina Kosala (South Kosala) [REF].
It is claimed that Chhattisgarh takes its name from the 36 ancient forts in the area[REF] (chhattis-thirty-six" and garh-fort).
Another view, more popular with experts and historians, is that Chhattisgarh is the corrupted form of Chedisgarh which means Raj or "Empire of the Chedis" [REF].
Lata mangeshkar sang a song for Chhattisgarhi film Bhakla of Dhriti pati sarkar.
Mohmd Rafi sang a song for Chhattisgarhi film.
Chhollywood is Chhattisgarh's film industries.
The State of Chhattisgarh is known as the rice bowl of India and has a rich tradition of food culture [REF].
Chhattisgarh has coverage of mostly 2-lane or 1-lane roads which provides connectivity to major cities. 11 national highways passing through the state which are together 3078.40 km in length.
Chhattisgarh has one of the lowest densities of National Highway in Central and South India (12.1 km/100,000 population) which is similar to the North Eastern state of Assam.
Almost the entire railway network spread over the state comes under the geographical jurisdiction of the South East Central Railway Zone of Indian Railways centred around Bilaspur, which is the zonal headquarters of this zone.
The state has the highest freight loading in the country and one-sixth of Indian Railway's revenue comes from Chhattisgarh.
Presently, Chhattisgarh has 1,187 km long railway line network, which is less than half of the national average of rail density.
The construction of new 546 km long rail network includiRajhara-Rowghat rail project, 311 km long East and East-West Rail Corridors and 140 km long Rowghat-Jagdalpur rail project are underway in the state.
The Chhattisgarh government has now decided to form a joint venture company with the Ministry of Railways for the expansion of railway tracks in the state.
Major Railway heads are Raipur, Bilaspur, Durg, Champa, Raigarh, Rajnandgaon .
The air infrastructure in Chhattisgarh is small compared to other states.
Other major areas in the north and south of state, and industrial cities such as Bilaspur, Korba, Raigarh are not served by any airline.
In ancient times, this region was known as Dakshina Kosala.
Chhattisgarh was under Maratha rule (Bhonsales of Nagpur) from 1741 to 1845 AD.
The area constituting the new state merged into on 1 November 1956, under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and remained a part of that state for 44 years.
The present state of Chhattisgarh was carved out of Madhya Pradesh on 1 November 2000 [REF].
The 1990s saw more activity for a demand for the new state, such as the formation of a statewide political forum, especially the Chhattisgarh Rajya Nirman Manch.
The new National Democratic Alliance (NDA) government sent the redrafted Separate Chhattisgarh Bill for the approval of the Madhya Pradesh Assembly, where it was once again unanimously approved and then it was tabled in the Lok Sabha.
The state hosts many religious sects such as Satnami Panth, Kabirpanth, Ramnami Samaj and others.
Chhattisgarh has a significant role in the life of lord Rama.
The Odia culture is prominent in the eastern parts of Chhattisgarh bordering Odisha.
Chhattisgarh is a storehouse of literature, performing arts and crafts - all of which derives its substance and sustenance from the day-to-day life experiences of its people.
Chhattisgarh is known for "Kosa silk" and "lost wax art".
Panthi, Rawat Nacha, Pandwani, Chaitra, Kaksar, Saila, Khamb-swang, Bhatra Naat, Rahas, Raai, Maao-Pata and Soowa are the several indigenous dance styles of Chhattisgarh.
Panthi, the folk dance of the Satnami community, has religious overtones.
the anniversary of the birth of Guru Ghasidas.
Pandavani is a folk ballad form performed predominantly in Chhattisgarh.
In Bilaspur, the Raut Nach Mahotsav folk dance festival is organized annually since 1978.
Soowa or Suwa tribal dance in Chhattisgarh is also known as Parrot Dance.
Tribal groups like Gonds, the Baigas and the Oraons in Chhattisgarh have Karma dance as part of their culture.
One of the most notable art museums in Moscow is the Tretyakov Gallery, which was founded by Pavel Tretyakov, a wealthy patron of the arts who donated a large private collection to the city [REF].
Another art museum in the city of Moscow is the Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts, which was founded by, among others, the father of Marina Tsvetaeva.
The State Historical Museum of Russia (Государственный Исторический музей) is a museum of Russian history located between Red Square and Manege Square in Moscow.
Moscow is the heart of the Russian performing arts, including ballet and film, with 68 museums[REF] 103[REF] theaters, 132 cinemas and 24 concert halls.
The Moscow International Performance Arts Center,[REF] opened in 2003, also known as Moscow International House of Music, is known for its performances in classical music.
Memorial Museum of Astronautics under the Monument to the Conquerors of Space in the end of Cosmonauts Alley is the central memorial place for the Russian space officials.
The Mosfilm studio was at the heart of many classic films, as it is responsible for both artistic and mainstream productions [REF].
The Shchusev State Museum of Architecture is the national museum of Russian architecture by the name of the architect Alexey Shchusev near the Kremlin area.
Over 500 Olympic sports champions lived in the city by 2005 [REF].
Moscow was the host city of the 1980 Summer Olympics, with the yachting events being held at Tallinn, in present-day Estonia.
The most titled ice hockey team in the Soviet Union and in the world, HC CSKA Moscow comes from Moscow.
The most titled Soviet, Russian, and one of the most titled Euroleague clubs, is the basketball club from Moscow PBC CSKA Moscow.
Moscow had more winners at the USSR and Russian Chess Championship than any other city.
The most titled volleyball team in the Soviet Union and in Europe (CEV Champions League) is VC CSKA Moscow.
In football, FC Spartak Moscow has won more championship titles in the Russian Premier League than any other team.
Moscow houses other prominent football, ice hockey, and basketball teams.
Because of Moscow's cold local climate, winter sports have a following.
Moscow hosts the annual Kremlin Cup, a popular tennis tournament on both the WTA and ATP tours.
Slava Moscow is a professional rugby club, competing in the national Professional Rugby League.
In the game of bandy, one of the most successful clubs in the world is 20 times and current Russian League champions Dynamo Moscow.
MFK Dinamo Moskva is one of the major futsal clubs in Europe.
The city is full of clubs, restaurants and bars.
The adjoining Tretyakovsky Proyezd, also south of Tverskaya Street, in Kitai-gorod, is host to upmarket boutique stores such as Bulgari, Tiffany & Co., Armani, Prada and Bentley [REF].
According to the results of the 2010 Census, the population of Moscow was 11,503,501;[REF] up from 10,382,754 recorded in the 2002 Census [REF].
The official population of Moscow is based on those holding "permanent residency."
Christianity is the predominant religion in the city, of which the Russian Orthodox Church is the most popular.
The Patriarch of Moscow serves as the head of the church and resides in the Danilov Monastery.
The Moscow mufti council claimed that Muslims numbered around 1.5 million of 10.5 millions of the city's population in 2010 [REF].
Moscow Cathedral Mosque has been built at the site of the former one.
Moscow has one of the largest municipal economies in Europe and it accounts more than 1/5 of Russian GDP [REF].
Moscow has the lowest unemployment rate of all federal subjects of Russia, standing at just 1% in 2010, compared to the national average of 7%.
Moscow is the financial center of Russia and home to the country's largest banks and many of its largest companies, such as natural gas giant Gazprom.
The Cherkizovskiy marketplace was the largest marketplace in Europe, with a daily turnover of about thirty million dollars and about ten thousand venders[REF] from different countries (including China, Turkey, Azerbaijan and India).
In 2008, Moscow had 74 billionaires with an average wealth of $5.9 billion, which placed it above New York's 71 billionaires.
The nouveau riche, also called the "New Russians", often in a derogatory sense, have a reputation for flaunting their wealth; the avenues for doing so have also increased in recent times at the many haute couture and haute cuisine spots in Moscow.
Primary industries in Moscow include the chemical, metallurgy, food, textile, furniture, energy production, software development and machinery industries.
The Mil Moscow Helicopter Plant is one of the leading producers of military and civil helicopters in the world.
The Electrozavod factory was the first transformer factory in Russia.
There are other industries located just outside the city of Moscow, as well as microelectronic industries in Zelenograd, including Ruselectronics companies.
Gazprom, the largest extractor of natural gas in the world and the largest Russian company, has head offices also in Moscow, as well as other oil, gas and electricity companies.
Moscow hosts headquarters of the many of telecommunication and technology companies, including 1C, ABBYY, Beeline, Kaspersky Lab, Mail.Ru Group, MegaFon, MTS, Rambler&Co, Rostelecom, Yandex, and Yota.
Some industry is being transferred out of the city to improve the ecological state of the city.
During Soviet times, apartments were lent to people by the government according to the square meters-per-person norm (some groups, including people's artists, heroes and prominent scientists had bonuses according to their honors).
The price of real estate in Moscow continues to rise.
A typical one-bedroom apartment is about , a typical two-bedroom apartment is , and a typical three-bedroom apartment is .
In 2006, Mercer Human Resources Consulting named Moscow the world's most expensive city for expatriate employees, ahead of perennial winner Tokyo, due to the stable Russian ruble as well as increasing housing prices within the city [REF].
In 2008, Moscow ranked top on the list of most expensive cities for the third year in a row [REF].
In 2014, according to Forbes, Moscow ranked the 9th most expensive city in the world.
The Moscow International Business Center is a projected new part of central Moscow.
The construction of Moscow-City takes place on the Krasnopresnenskaya embankment.
The Federation Tower, completed in 2016, is the tallest building in Europe.
A Fourth Ring freeway (in addition to Moscow Automobile Ring Road, Garden Ring and the Third Ring) has been designed and is being built around Moscow.
A rail connection linking the international airports at Vnukovo and Sheremetyevo with downtown terminals is also planned.
In March 2009 the Russian business newspaper Kommersant[REF][REF][REF][REF] reported that because of the worldwide economic crisis, which started in 2008 and spread globally, many of the construction projects in Moscow (especially in the Moscow International Business Center) are frozen and may be cancelled altogether-like the ambitious "Russia Tower" in "Moscow-city".
The name of the city is thought to be derived from the name of the Moskva River [REF].
The original Old Russian form of the name is reconstructed as *, *Mosky,[REF][REF] hence it was one of a few Slavic ū-stem nouns.
However, the form Moskovĭ has left some traces in many other languages, such as , , , , , , , , etc.
Various other theories (of Celtic, Iranian, Caucasic, Finno-Ugrian origin), having little or no scientific ground, are now largely rejected by contemporary linguists [REF].
There has been as well a naïve scholastic etymology that connected the name of Mosoch, a son of Japheth, with the name of the city, so that it was thought that the biblical figure was a forefather of Russians as well as other Slavs.
Sheremetyevo International Airport is the most common entry point for foreign visitors, handling 60% of all international flights [REF].
There are a number of smaller airports close to Moscow (19 in Moscow Oblast) such as Myachkovo Airport, that are intended for private aircraft, helicopters and charters [REF].
Moscow has two passenger terminals, (South River Terminal and North River Terminal or Rechnoy vokzal), on the river and regular ship routes and cruises along the Moskva and Oka rivers, which are used mostly for entertainment.
Train stations to serve the city.
The terminals are located close to the city center, along the metro ringline 5 or close to it, and connect to a metroline to the centre of town.
Suburbs and satellite cities are connected by commuter elektrichka (electric rail) network.
During the 2010s, the Moscow (Little) Ring Railway was converted to be used for frequent passenger service; it is fully integrated with Moscow Metro; the passenger service started on September 10, 2016.
The Greater Ring of the Moscow Railway forms a ring around the main part of Moscow.
Local transport includes the Moscow Metro, a metro system famous for its art, murals, mosaics, and ornate chandeliers.
Moscow Central Circle is a urban-metro railway orbital line that encircles historical Moscow.
As Metro stations outside the city center are far apart in comparison to other cities, up to , a bus network radiates from each station to the surrounding residential zones.
Every major street in the city is served by at least one bus route.
With the total line length of almost of single wire, 8 depots, 104 routes and 1740 vehicles, the Moscow trolleybus system is the largest in the world.
The Moscow Metro company operates a short monorail line.
Moscow has an extensive tram system, which first opened in 1899.
The Apakov depot services the south-western part from the Varshavsky lane - Simferopolsky boulevard in the east to the Universitet station in the west and Boulevard lane at the center.
Main three depot networks with railway gate and tram-repair plant.
In addition, tram advocates have suggested that the new rapid transit services (metro to City, Butovo light metro, Monorail) would be more effective as at-grade tram lines and that the current problems with trams are only due to poor management and operation, not the technical properties of trams.
Taxi service market in Moscow has changed dramatically over the years 2014-2015.
There are over 2.6 million cars in the city daily.
The MKAD, along with the Third Transport Ring and the future Fourth Transport Ring, is one of only three freeways that run within Moscow city limits.
Moscow is home to nearly all of Russia's nationwide television networks, radio stations, newspapers and magazines.
English-language media include The Moscow Times and Moscow News, which are, respectively, the largest[REF] and oldest English-language weekly newspapers in all of Russia.
Other media in Moscow include the Echo of Moscow, the first Soviet and Russian private news radio and information agency, and NTV, one of the first privately owned Russian television stations.
Moscow is the seat of power for the Russian Federation.
Moscow is designated as one of three federal cities of Russia - the others being Saint Petersburg and Sevastopol (although the status of the latter is disputed).
The Mayor of Moscow is the leading official in the executive, leading the Government of Moscow which is the highest organ of executive power.
The Moscow City Duma is the City Duma (city council or local parliament) and local laws must be approved by it.
The entire city of Moscow is headed by one mayor (Sergey Sobyanin).
The Russian capital's town-planning development began to show as early as the 12th century, when the city was founded.
All administrative okrugs and districts have their own coats of arms and flags as well as individual heads of the area.
In addition to the districts, there are Territorial Units with Special Status.
Moscow also hosts some of the government bodies of Moscow Oblast, although the city itself is not a part of the oblast [REF].
Moscow is situated on the banks of the Moskva River, which flows for just over through the East European Plain in central Russia.
Moscow serves as the reference point for the timezone used in most of European Russia, including Saint Petersburg, Belarus, and the Republic of Crimea.
Moscow has a hemiboreal climate (Köppen climate classification Dfb) with long, cold (although average by Russian standards) winters usually lasting from mid-November through the end of March, and warm summers.
Typical high temperatures in the warm months of June, July and August are around a comfortable , but during heat waves (which can occur between May and September), daytime high temperatures often exceed , sometimes for a week or two at a time.
The highest temperature ever recorded was [REF] at the VVC weather station and in the center of Moscow and Domodedovo airport on July 29, 2010 during the unusual 2010 Northern Hemisphere summer heat wave.
On average Moscow has 1731 hours of sunshine per year, varying from a low of 8% in December to 52% from May to August [REF].
Temperatures in the centre of Moscow are often significantly higher than in the outskirts and nearby suburbs, especially in winter.
Below is the 1961-1990 normals table.
Moscow, being in the mid-latitudes of the northern hemisphere, is a place with the most expressed signs of global warming.
There are 1696 high schools in Moscow, as well as 91 colleges [REF].
The I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University named after Ivan Sechenov or formerly known as Moscow Medical Academy (1stMSMU) is a medical university situated in Moscow, Russia.
Moscow is one of the financial centers of the Russian Federation and CIS countries and is known for its business schools.
Bauman Moscow State Technical University, founded in 1830, is located in the center of Moscow and provides 18,000 undergraduate and 1,000 postgraduate students with an education in science and engineering, offering technical degrees [REF].
The Moscow Conservatory,[REF] founded in 1866 is a prominent music school in Russia, whose graduates include Sergey Rachmaninoff, Alexander Scriabin, Aram Khachaturian, Mstislav Rostropovich, and Alfred Schnittke.
The Gerasimov All-Russian State Institute of Cinematography, abbreviated as VGIK, is the world's oldest educational institution in Cinematography, founded by Vladimir Gardin in 1919.
Moscow State Institute of International Relations, founded in 1944, remains Russia's best- known school of international relations and diplomacy, with six schools focused on international relations.
Other institutions are the Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, also known as Phystech, the Fyodorov Eye Microsurgery Complex, founded in 1988 by Russian eye surgeon Svyatoslav Fyodorov, the Moscow Aviation Institute, the Moscow Motorway Institute (State Technical University), and the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute.
Although Moscow has a number of famous Soviet-era higher educational institutions, most of which are more oriented towards engineering or the fundamental sciences, in recent years Moscow has seen a growth in the number of commercial and private institutions that offer classes in business and management.
Moscow is one of the largest science centers in Russia.
There are 452 libraries in the city, including 168 for children [REF].
The State Public Historical Library, founded in 1863, is the largest library specialising in Russian history.
In regards to primary and secondary education, Clifford J. Levy of The New York Times said "Moscow has some strong public schools, but the system as a whole is dispiriting, in part because it is being corroded by the corruption that is a post-Soviet scourge.
The oldest evidence of humans on the territory of Moscow dates from the Neolithic (Schukinskaya site on the Moscow River).
The earliest East Slavic tribes recorded as having expanded to the upper Volga in the 9th to 10th centuries are the Vyatichi and Krivichi.
The first known reference to Moscow dates from 1147 as a meeting place of Yuri Dolgoruky and Sviatoslav Olgovich.
In 1156, Knjaz Yury Dolgoruky fortified the town with a timber fence and a moat.
The timber fort na Moskvě "on the Moscow river" was inherited by Daniel, the youngest son of Alexander Nevsky, in the 1260s, at the time considered the least valuable of his father's possessions.
Daniel came of age in the 1270s and became involved in the power struggles of the principality with lasting success, siding with his brother Dmitry in his bid for the rule of Novgorod.
Daniel I ruled Moscow as Grand Duke until 1303 and established it as a prosperous city which would eclipse its parent principality of Vladimir by the 1320s.
On the right bank of the Moskva River, at a distance of from the Kremlin, not later than in 1282, Daniel founded the first monastery with the wooden church of St. Daniel-Stylite.
Moscow was stable and prosperous for many years and attracted a large numbers of refugees from across Russia.
While Khan of the Golden Horde initially attempted to limit Moscow's influence, when the growth of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania began to threaten all of Russia, the Khan strengthened Moscow to counterbalance Lithuania, allowing it to become one of the most powerful cities in Russia.
In 1462 Ivan III, known as Ivan the Great (1440-1505) became Grand Prince of Moscow (then part of the medieval Muscovy state).
The original Moscow Kremlin was built during the 14th century.
A trading settlement, or posad, grew up to the east of the Kremlin, in the area known as Zaradye (Зарядье).
In 1508-1516, the Italian architect Aleviz Fryazin (Novy) arranged for the construction of a moat in front of the eastern wall, which would connect the Moskva and Neglinnaya and be filled in with water from Neglinnaya.
The Crimean Tatars attacked again in 1591, but this time were held back by new defense walls, built between 1584 and 1591 by a craftsman named Fyodor Kon.
The Russian famine of 1601-03 killed perhaps 100,000 in Moscow.
During the first half of the 17th century, the population of Moscow doubled from roughly 100,000 to 200,000.
The entire city of the late 17th century, including the slobodas which grew up outside of the city ramparts, are contained within what is today Moscow's Central Administrative Okrug.
Numerous disasters befell the city.
Moscow ceased to be Russia's capital (except for a brief period from 1728 to 1732 under the influence of the Supreme Privy Council) when Peter the Great moved his government to the newly built Saint Petersburg on the Baltic coast in 1712.
After losing the status as capital of the empire, the population of Moscow at first decreased, from 200,000 in the 17th century to 130,000 in 1750.
By 1700, the building of cobbled roads had begun.
In the early 19th century, the Arch of Konstantino-Elenensky gate was paved with bricks, but the Spassky Gate was the main front gate of the Kremlin and used for royal entrances.
The road connecting Moscow with St. Petersburg, now the M10 highway, was completed in 1746, its Moscow end following the old Tver road which had existed since the 16th century.
When Napoleon invaded Russia in 1812, the Moscovites were evacuated.
Moscow State University was established in 1755.
The Arbat Street had been in existence since at least the 15th century, but it was developed into a prestigious area during the 18th century.
In the 1830s, general Alexander Bashilov planned the first regular grid of city streets north from Petrovsky Palace.
When Catherine II came to power in 1762, the city's filth and smell of sewage was depicted by observers as a symptom of disorderly life styles of lower-class Russians recently arrived from the farms.
Following the success of the Russian Revolution of 1917, Vladimir Lenin, fearing possible foreign invasion, moved the capital from Saint Petersburg back to Moscow on March 5, 1918.
During the Great Patriotic War, the Soviet State Committee of Defense and the General Staff of the Red Army were located in Moscow.
Both German and Soviet casualties during the battle of Moscow have been a subject of debate, as various sources provide somewhat different estimates.
During the postwar years, there was a serious housing crisis, solved by the invention of high-rise apartments.
The city of Zelenograd was built in 1958 at from the city center to the north-west, along the Leningradskoye Shosse, and incorporated as one of Moscow's administrative okrugs.
On May 8, 1965 due to the actual 20th anniversary of the victory in World War II Moscow was awarded a title of the Hero City.
The MKAD ring road was opened in 1961.
The Moscow Metro opened in 1935 and immediately became the centerpiece of the transportation system.
When the USSR was dissolved in the same year, Moscow remained the capital of the Russian SFSR (on December 25, 1991 the Russian SFSR was renamed the Russian Federation).
The city has continued to grow during the 1990s to 2000s, its population rising from below nine to above ten million.
Medieval Moscow's design was of concentric walls and intersecting radial thoroughfares.
The Kremlin was rebuilt in the 15th century.
The city's appearance had not changed much by the 18th century.
For much of its architectural history, Moscow was dominated by Orthodox churches.
While the later Stalinist period was characterized by the curtailing of creativity and architectural innovation, the earlier post-revolutionary years saw a plethora of radical new buildings created in the city.
Perhaps the most recognizable contributions of the Stalinist period are the so-called Seven Sisters, comprising seven massive skyscrapers scattered throughout the city at about an equal distance from the Kremlin.
The Soviet goal of providing housing for every family, and the rapid growth of Moscow's population, led to the construction of large, monotonous housing blocks.
Although the city still has some five-story apartment buildings constructed before the mid-1960s, more recent apartment buildings are usually at least nine floors tall, and have elevators.
Stalinist-era buildings, mostly found in the central part of the city, are massive and usually ornamented with Socialist realism motifs that imitate classical themes.
Attempts are being made to restore many of the city's best-kept examples of pre-Soviet architecture.
Plaques on house exteriors will inform passers-by that a well-known personality once lived there.
Moscow's skyline is quickly modernizing with several new towers under construction.
Some organizations, such as Moscow Architecture Preservation Society[REF] and Save Europe's Heritage,[REF] are trying to draw the international public attention to these problems [REF].
There are 96 parks and 18 gardens in Moscow, including four botanical gardens.
Gorky Park (officially the Central Park of Culture and Rest named after Maxim Gorky), was founded in 1928.
Several parks include a section known as a "Park of Culture and Rest", sometimes alongside a much wilder area (this includes parks such as Izmaylovsky, Fili and Sokolniki).
Izmaylovsky Park, created in 1931, is one of the largest urban parks in the world along with Richmond Park in London.
Sokolniki Park, named after the falcon hunting that occurred there in the past, is one of the oldest parks in Moscow and has an area of 6km2.
Losiny Ostrov National Park ("Elk Island" National Park), with a total area of more than 116km2, borders Sokolniki Park and was Russia's first national park.
Tsytsin Main Botanical Garden of Academy of Sciences, founded in 1945 is the largest in Europe [REF].
The All-Russian Exhibition Center (Всероссийский выставочный центр), formerly known as the All-Union Agricultural Exhibition (VSKhV) and later Exhibition of Achievements of the National Economy (VDNKh), though officially named a "permanent trade show", is one of the most prominent examples of Stalinist-era monumental architecture.
Lilac Park, founded in 1958, has a permanent sculpture display and a large rosarium.
Moscow has always been a popular destination for tourists.
Near the new Tretyakov Gallery there is a sculpture garden, Museon, often called "the graveyard of fallen monuments" that displays statues of the former Soviet Union that were removed from their place after its dissolution.
Other attractions include the Moscow Zoo, a zoological garden in two sections (the valleys of two streams) linked by a bridge, with nearly a thousand species and more than 6,500 specimens [REF].
Moscow's road system is centered roughly on the Kremlin at the heart of the city.
The first and innermost major ring, Bulvarnoye Koltso (Boulevard Ring), was built at the former location of the 16th-century city wall around what used to be called Bely Gorod (White Town) [REF].
The second primary ring, located outside the bell end of the Boulevard Ring, is the Sadovoye Koltso (Garden Ring).
The third ring, the Third Transport Ring, was completed in 2003 as a high-speed freeway.
The Fourth Transport Ring, another freeway, is under construction to further reduce traffic congestion.
Aside from aforementioned hierarchy, line 5 of Moscow Metro is a complete circle line (hence the name Кольцевая Линия, which literally means ring line).
The outermost ring within Moscow is the Moscow Automobile Ring Road (often called the MKAD from the Russian Московская Кольцевая Автомобильная Дорога), which forms the approximate boundary of the city, was established in the 1950s.
10 september 2016, Moscow Central Circle railway, made by renovating pre-Soviet era Moscow Circling Railway (Moskovskaya Okruzhnaya Zheleznaya Doroga), has been launched as on-ground extention to existing Moscow Metro subway, assigned to it as its 14th line, with multiple transits from existing subway stations.
Watsonville is located in the Monterey Bay area about 95 miles south of San Francisco at the southern end of Santa Cruz County [REF].
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which, of it is land and of it (1.42%) is water.
The National Weather Service cooperative station at the Watsonville Waterworks reports cool, relatively wet winters and mild, dry summers.
January, normally the coldest month, has an average maximum of 59.9 °F and an average minimum of 38.5 °F.
Average annual rainfall is 22.42 inches, with measurable precipitation falling on an average of 61 days each year.
Public schools in Watsonville fall under the jurisdiction of the Pajaro Valley Unified School District [REF].
All charter schools in Watsonville are under the jurisdiction of the Pajaro Valley Unified School District.
Mount Madonna Institute College of Ayurveda and Yoga .
The 2010 United States Census[REF] reported that Watsonville had a population of 51,199.
The Census reported that 50,671 people (99.0% of the population) lived in households, 322 (0.6%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 206 (0.4%) were institutionalized.
There were 13,528 households, out of which 7,130 (52.7%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 7,231 (53.5%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 2,375 (17.6%) had a female householder with no husband present, 903 (6.7%) had a male householder with no wife present.
The population was spread out with 16,111 people (31.5%) under the age of 18, 6,001 people (11.7%) aged 18 to 24, 14,834 people (29.0%) aged 25 to 44, 10,014 people (19.6%) aged 45 to 64, and 4,239 people (8.3%) who were 65 years of age or older.
There were 14,089 housing units at an average density of 2,077.0 per square mile (801.9/km²), of which 5,957 (44.0%) were owner-occupied, and 7,571 (56.0%) were occupied by renters.
As reported by the 2007-2011 American Community Survey, the median income for a household in the city was $46,073, and the median income for a family was $49,550.
As of the census[REF] of 2000, there were 44,265 people, 11,381 households, and 8,865 families residing in the city.
Watsonville also has a large Asian-American presence consisting of Chinese, Japanese and Filipinos despite the fact that the percentage of city residents of Asian descent has dropped since 1960.
There were 11,381 households out of which 49.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.3% were married couples living together, 16.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.1% were non-families.
In the city, the population was spread out with 34.0% under the age of 18, 11.8% from 18 to 24, 30.5% from 25 to 44, 15.1% from 45 to 64, and 8.6% who were 65 years of age or older.
The median income for a household in the city was $37,617, and the median income for a family was $40,293.
The main industries in Watsonville are construction, agriculture and manufacturing.
Watsonville is known for the production of crops and goods in the agricultural business along the Northern Pacific Coast.
During Spanish and Mexican times, the Pajaro Valley was at first used as pastureland for the Carmel mission, then was divided up into several large ranchos, mainly raising cattle.
Santa Cruz County and Monterey County work together to provide training for workers in new job skills that are needed in the industries of farming and construction in the city.
The City of Watsonville was incorporated on March 30, 1868[REF] It adopted its first charter in 1903.
Watsonville does not practice water fluoridation.
After several years of legal wrangling,[REF] Watsonville was cited in August 2010[REF] for violating a California state law that requires fluoridating the water in a town over 10,000 people when outside money becomes available [REF].
The Santa Cruz Sentinel reported that "[i]n a 4-3 vote [on September 28, 2010], the City Council approved a contract for a $1.6 million grant from the California Dental Association Foundation to design and build a fluoridation system and operate it for two years."[REF] .
Eventually the California Dental Association Foundation notified the City that it was too expensive to fluoridate the City's water supply.
In the California State Legislature, Watsonville is in , and in [REF].
In the United States House of Representatives, Watsonville is in [REF].
Watsonville provides a wide variety of recreational opportunities including hiking, boating, festivals, sports, birdwatching, and beach access.
Watsonville is home to the annual Strawberry Festival, which includes a wide variety of strawberry based foods, live music, vendors, and rides [REF].
Watsonville Municipal Airport (WVI) is home to the annual Watsonville Fly-in and Air Show, which showcases both military and civilian aircraft and includes a small car show [REF].
Near the end of every summer, the Santa Cruz County fair has drawn visitors from across and outside the county to its many attractions including rides, food, art exhibits, flower exhibits, pony rides, petting zoos, dog shows, and live music performances, among other things [REF].
The fairgrounds also host a number of different events including car races at the Ocean Speedway, dog training programs, wedding receptions, the annual Santa Cruz County Science Fair, and the Scottish Renaissance Festival [REF].
The City maintains 28 unique parks, including a skate park, indoor soccer field, lake with boat rentals and RV camping, BBQ areas, handball courts, an art gallery, tennis courts, and volleyball courts [REF].
Hiking trails are positioned throughout the city as well as a nature center provides the public with an intimate view of The Watsonville Wetlands [REF].
A number of trail heads have been built throughout the city, which provide access to the Pajaro River and its tributaries via The Pajaro River Levee Trail Park.
The City operates one of two parks at Pinto Lake, which includes a small watercraft launch ramp, group picnic areas, an RV park, a Baseball field, Volleyball, children's playground, boat rentals, fishing, and bird watching.
The Pajaro Dunes area of Watsonville attracts tourists to its high end beach front condos and time shares.
The town was the location in which much of Killer Klowns From Outer Space, a cult classic, was filmed.
California writer Robert A. Heinlein set a part of his 1982 novel Friday at Pajaro Sands, near Watsonville.
The 1996 play Watsonville by Cherríe Moraga is set in the city.
Watsonville's land was first inhabited by an Indian tribe called the Costanoans.
The first European land exploration of Alta California, the Spanish Portolà expedition, passed through the area on its way north, camping at one of the lakes north of town for five nights, on October 10-14, 1769.
Watsonville is located on the Rancho Bolsa del Pajaro Mexican land grant made to Sebastian Rodríguez in 1837.
The City of Watsonville has habitat areas that support the endangered species Santa Cruz Tarweed on the California coastal prairie ecosystem.
Most of the coastal land adjacent to Watsonville is part of the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary, a designation championed by former Congressman Leon Panetta.
Another protected natural resource is the Watsonville wetlands.
In 1990 both private and municipal organizations worked together to stop development and protect this important resource [REF].
Despite the large reserves, the cost of extracting the oil from bituminous sands has historically made production of the oil sands unprofitable-the cost of selling the extracted crude would not cover the direct costs of recovery; labour to mine the sands and fuel to extract the crude.
In mid-2006, the National Energy Board of Canada estimated the operating cost of a new mining operation in the Athabasca oil sands to be C$9 to C$12 per barrel, while the cost of an in-situ SAGD operation (using dual horizontal wells) would be C$10 to C$14 per barrel [REF].
The capital cost of the equipment required to mine the sands and haul it to processing is a major consideration in starting production.
However, the development of commercial production is made easier by the fact that exploration costs are very low.
As a result of the oil price increases since 2003, the economics of oil sands have improved dramatically.
At present the area around Fort McMurray has seen the most effect from the increased activity in the oil sands.
Despite the best efforts of companies to move as much of the construction work as possible out of the Fort McMurray area, and even out of Alberta, the shortage of skilled workers is spreading to the rest of the province [REF].
The key characteristic of the Athabasca deposit is that it is the only one shallow enough to be suitable for surface mining.
The Albian Sands mine (operated by Shell Canada) opened in 2003.
The Energy Resource Conservation Board has approved over 100 mining and in-situ projects despite the negative environmental impacts.
Indigenous peoples of the area include the Fort McKay First Nation.
The Fort McKay First Nation has formed several companies to service the oil sands industry and will be developing a mine on their territory [REF].
The Alberta Cancer Board published research of the cancer rates of those living in Fort Chipewyan, Alberta in 2009.
The Athabasca oil sands are named after the Athabasca River which cuts through the heart of the deposit, and traces of the heavy oil are readily observed on the river banks.
The Athabasca oil sands first came to the attention of European fur traders in 1719 when Wa-pa-su, a Cree trader, brought a sample of bituminous sands to the Hudson's Bay Company post at York Factory on Hudson Bay where Henry Kelsey was the manager.
John Richardson did the first serious scientific assessment of the oil sands in 1848 on his way north to search for Franklin's lost expedition.
Count Alfred von Hammerstein (1870-1941), who arrived in the region in 1897, promoted the Athabaska oil sands for over forty years, taking photos with descriptive titles such as "Tar Sands and Flowing Asphaltum in the Athabasca District," that are now in the National Library and National Archives Canada.
In 1926, Karl Clark of the University of Alberta received a patent for a hot water separation process which was the forerunner of today's thermal extraction processes.
A pioneer in the discovery and use of natural gas was Georg Naumann.
The proposal, originally known as "Project Cauldron," was devised by geologist Manley L. Natland at Los Angeles-based Richfield Oil Corporation.
In April 1959, the Federal Mines Department approved Project Oilsand [REF].
The United States government continued with exploring the peaceful uses of nuclear detonations with Operation Plowshare, but was likewise eventually terminated in 1977.
The oil sands, which are typically thick and sit on top of relatively flat limestone rock, are relatively easy to access.
Commercial production of oil from the Athabasca oil sands began in 1967, with the opening of the Great Canadian Oil Sands (GCOS) plant in Fort McMurray.
In 1979, Sun formed Suncor by merging its Canadian refining and retailing interests with Great Canadian Oil Sands and its conventional oil and gas interests.
Suncor continued to grow and continued to produce more and more oil from its oil sands operations regardless of fluctuating market prices, and eventually became bigger than its former parent company.
Suncor Energy's Steepbank and Millennium mines currently produce and its Firebag in-situ project produces .
Syncrude's Mildred Lake and Aurora mines currently can produce .
Shell Canada currently operates its Muskeg River Mine producing and the Scotford Upgrader at Fort Saskatchewan, Alberta.
Nexen's in-situ Long Lake SAGD project is now producing .
CNRL's $8 billion Horizon mine is planned to produce on startup in mid-2009 and grow to by 2010.
Total S.A.'s subsidiary Deer Creek Energy was operating a SAGD project on its Joslyn lease, producing .
Imperial Oil's 4.6 billion barrel Kearl Oil Sands Project is projected to start construction in 2008 and produce by the end of 2012.
Synenco Energy and SinoCanada Petroleum Corp., a subsidiary of Sinopec, China's largest oil refiner, had agreed to create the 3.5 billion Northern Lights mine, projected to produce by 2009.
North American Oil Sands Corporation (NAOSC), a subsidiary of Statoil, is expected to produce in the Kai Kos Dehseh project around by 2015.
As of December 2008, the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers revised its 2008-2020 crude oil forecasts to account for project cancellations and cutbacks as a result of the price declines in the second half of 2008.
In early December 2007, London based BP and Calgary based Husky Energy announced a 50/50 joint venture to produce and refine bitumen from the Athabasca oil sands.
In mid December 2007, ConocoPhillips announced its intention to increase its oil sands production from to over the next 20 years, which would make it the largest private sector oil sands producer in the world.
Since Great Canadian Oil Sands (now Suncor) started operation of its mine in 1967, bitumen has been extracted on a commercial scale from the Athabasca Oil Sands by surface mining.
These early mines had a steep learning curve to deal with before their bitumen mining techniques became efficient.
In recent years, companies such as Syncrude and Suncor have switched to much cheaper shovel-and-truck operations using the biggest power shovels (100 or more tons) and dump trucks (400 tons) in the world [REF].
After excavation, hot water and caustic soda (NaOH) is added to the sand, and the resulting slurry is piped to the extraction plant where it is agitated and the oil skimmed from the top [REF].
About two tons of oil sands are required to produce one barrel (roughly 1/8 of a ton) of oil.
Alberta Taciuk Process technology extracts bitumen from oil sands through a dry-retorting.
The original process for extraction of bitumen from the sands was developed by Dr. Karl Clark, working with the Alberta Research Council in the 1920s [REF].
The recovered bitumen froth needs to be cleaned to reject the contained solids and water to meet the requirement of downstream upgrading processes.
Steam Assisted Gravity Drainage (SAGD) is an enhanced oil recovery technology for producing heavy crude oil and bitumen.
More recently, in situ methods like steam-assisted gravity-drainage (SAGD) and cyclic steam stimulation (CSS) have been developed to extract bitumen from deep deposits by injecting steam to heat the sands and reduce the bitumen viscosity so that it can be pumped out like conventional crude oil [REF].
The standard extraction process requires huge amounts of natural gas.
According to the National Energy Board, it requires about 1200cuft of natural gas to produce one barrel of bitumen from in situ projects and about 700cuft for integrated projects [REF].
Critics contend that government and industry measures taken to reduce environmental and health risks posed by large-scale mining operations are inadequate, causing unacceptable damage to the natural environment and human welfare [REF].
Approximately 20% of Alberta's oil sands are recoverable through open-pit mining, while 80% require in situ extraction technologies (largely because of their depth).
In some particular circumstances the government considers agricultural land to be equivalent to forest land.
A Pembina Institute report stated "To produce one cubic metre (m3) of synthetic crude oil (SCO) (upgraded bitumen) in a mining operation requires about 2-4.5 m3 of water (net figures).
The Athabasca River runs 1,231 kilometres from the Athabasca Glacier in west-central Alberta to Lake Athabasca in northeastern Alberta [REF].
Water licence allocations total about 1% of the Athabasca River average annual flow, though actual withdrawals for all uses, in 2006, amount to about 0.4% [REF].
Since the beginning of the oil sands development, there have been several leaks into the Athabasca River polluting it with oil and tailing pond water.
Natural toxicants derived from bitumen in Northern Alberta pose potential ecological and human health risks to northerners living in the area.
The processing of bitumen into synthetic crude requires energy, which is currently being generated by burning natural gas.
The forecast growth in synthetic oil production in Alberta also threatens Canada's international commitments.
Ranked as the world's eighth largest emitter of greenhouse gases, Canada is a relatively large emitter given its population and is missing its Kyoto targets.
In Northern Alberta, oil development activities bring an enormous number of people into a fragile ecosystem.
Wildlife living near the Athabasca River have been greatly impacted due to pollutants entering the water system.
There has also been a large impact on the fish that live and spawn in the area.
While there has been no link yet made between the oil sands and health issues, Matt Price of Environmental Defense says the connection makes common sense.
Large volumes of tailings are a byproduct of bitumen extraction from the oil sands and managing these tailings is one of the most difficult environmental challenges facing the oil sands industry [REF].
Suncor invested $1.2 billion in their Tailings Reduction Operations (TROTM) method [REF] that treats mature fine tails (MFT) from tailings ponds with chemical flocculant, an anionic Polyacrylamide, commonly used in water treatment plants to improve removal of total organic content (TOC), to speed their drying into more easily reclaimable matter.
By 2010 Suncor had transformed their first tailings pond, Pond One, into Wapisiw Lookout, the first reclaimed settling basin in the oil sands.
In March 2012 an alliance of oil companies called Canada's Oil Sands Innovation Alliance (COSIA) was launched with a mandate to share research and technology to decrease the negative environmental impact of oil sands production focusing on tailings ponds, greenhouse gases, water and land.
In January 2013, scientists from Queen's University published a report analyzing lake sediments in the Athabasca region over the past fifty years [REF].
The Pembina Institute suggested that the huge investments by many companies in Canadian oil sands leading to increased production results in excess bitumen with no place to store it.
The oil sands industry may build a series of up to thirty lakes by pumping water into old mine pits when they have finished excavation leaving toxic effluent at their bottoms and letting biological processes restore it to health.
See main article Long Lake .
In July 2015, one of the largest leaks in Canada's history spilled 5,000 cubic metres of emulsion - about 5 million litres of bitumen, sand and wastewater - from a Nexen Energy pipeline at a Long Lake oil sands facility, south of Fort McMurray.
The governance of the Alberta oil sands is focused on economic development, and has historically been dominated by the interests of two primary actors; government (federal and provincial) and industry.
Ottawa has avoided direct investment, preferring to improve the investment climate.
Industry is the core force of oil sands development.
Governance (policy, administration, regulation) over the oil sands is held almost entirely by the Ministry of Energy (Alberta) and its various departments.
On October 17, 2012, the Alberta government announced it would follow the recommendations of a working group to develop an agency that would monitor the environmental impact of the oil sands.
On 17 June 2013 the newly formed corporation, Alberta Energy Regulator (AER) [REF] was phased in with a mandate to regulate oil, gas and coal development in Alberta including the Athabasca oil sands [REF].
At the turn of the 21st century, oil sands development in Canada started to take off, with an expansion at the Suncor mine, a new mine and expansion at Syncrude, and a new mine by Royal Dutch Shell associated with their new Scotford Upgrader near Edmonton.
Shell Canada's third mine began operating in 2003.
As of 2006, oil sands production had increased to .
In 2012, the actual oil production from oil sands was 1.8 MBPD [REF].
Canada is the largest source of oil imported by the United States, supplying nearly a million barrels a day from oil sand sources.
The Athabasca oil sands are often a topic in international trade talks, with energy rivals China and the United States negotiating with Canada for a bigger share of the rapidly increasing output.
An agreement has been signed between PetroChina and Enbridge to build a pipeline from Edmonton, Alberta, to the west coast port of Kitimat, British Columbia.
On August 20, 2009, the U.S. State Department issued a presidential permit for an Alberta Clipper Pipeline that will run from Hardisty, Alberta to Superior, Wisconsin.
The risk of Luftwaffe attack on training bases in Great Britain coupled with the urgent need for larger numbers of well trained aircrew than the pre-war systems could produce brought about the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan (BCATP), often referred to as simply "The Plan" [REF].
On completion of basic military training aircrew candidates would wear a white flash on the front of their service issue "side caps" denoting their "aircrew under training" status.
The next phase of training was usually in Britain at one of the Operational Training Units (OTU) [REF].
In the first half of the war completion of training at an OTU would mean each crew transferring to an operational squadron and beginning their operational tour.
During mid-wartime many crews trained using "tired" Vickers Wellington bombers,[REF] at OTUs and then had to convert,[REF] learning to fly the four-engined Stirling, Halifax or Lancasters which they would fly after joining their squadrons.
Aircrew had to become accustomed very quickly to the casualty rate suffered by RAF Bomber Command squadrons because fellow crews were lost or in aircrew language, "bought the farm", "got the chop" or "Failed To Return" (FTR), frequently [REF].
Squadrons would normally be tasked to dispatch 12 - 25 aircraft on a night operation and at least one of their crews would be expected to be lost every two night operations.
A total of 57,205 members of RAF Bomber Command or airmen flying on attachment to RAF Bomber Command were killed or posted missing in World War II [REF].
The majority of RAF Bomber Command aircrew lost over enemy held territory or the sea were killed although 9,838 became prisoners of war [REF].
Aircrew escaping were rarely shot although a small number of incidents are recorded and one airman was killed when he was hit by a railway train while dodging the Germans.
At the outbreak of war bomber aircrew were almost completely Royal Air Force or Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve or Auxiliary Air Force although a number of commissioned officers of the RAF were Canadians, Australians, New Zealanders, Rhodesians and South Africans.
By 1941 bomber crews included men of the Royal Canadian Air Force, Royal Australian Air Force or Royal New Zealand Air Force and by 1942 there were entire squadrons of those Commonwealth Air Forces in which a very substantial percentage of the airmen were from the parent countries.
Several Polish squadrons were formed in England after the Battle of France comprising Polish personnel who wished to continue the fight against the Germans.
Some RAF Bomber Command airmen received awards for their gallantry in specific actions or for their sustained courage facing the terrible odds against their surviving a full tour of operations.
Most aircrew who flew operationally received the 1939-45 Star, the Aircrew Europe Star and the War Medal 1939-45 for their service if they flew during the period September 1939 to late April 1944.
Any aircrew who had already qualified for the Aircrew Europe Star group of medals, who flew operationally after 6 June 1944 (D-Day) would have been entitled to a small metal bar with the words "France and Germany" to sew to the ribbon of the Aircrew Europe Star.
Aircrew would usually be aware that either "Ops are on tonight" or "we're stood down" (in their own terminology) from at least mid-morning on a particular day [REF].
During the day crews would briefly "air test" the aircraft assigned to them to ensure that it was working properly and that their personal equipment, oxygen supply, heated flight suits and machineguns were all ready [REF].
As soon as the ground crew commenced preparing the aircraft they would be able to estimate what the night's operation was likely to be based on the payload of bombs (or sea mines) coupled with the fuel load to be pumped into the wing tanks [REF].
Briefings usually commenced during the afternoons and for reasons of security the bomber base would be closed down to all but the most necessary traffic in or out to reduce to a minimum any leakage of intelligence which might help to forewarn the enemy,[REF] even public telephones were padlocked [REF].
Signalled in the darkness by an arrangement similar to traffic lights,[REF] the crew awaited their turn to take off, wireless traffic was kept to an absolute minimum to avoid alerting the German wireless listening services [REF].
Bombers operating from bases north of the River Humber usually crossed the English coast at Flamborough Head or Spurn Point and those from bases to the south of there would cross at Cromer [REF].
After making their attack the crew would head away from the target area making as much speed as possible on the track for home while avoiding known flak concentrations and fighter hot-spots.
On arrival back at base the bombers were granted permission to land based on their fuel reserves, wounded crewmen and battle damage [REF].
From the outbreak of war RAF Bomber Command aircrew were tasked to fly a required number of operations, an "operational tour", usually of about 30 operations (missions in USAAF terminology) [REF].
In order to improve the accuracy of bombing RAF Bomber Command formed No. 8 Group RAF, Pathfinder Force from a cadre of highly experienced squadron and flight commanders supported by several highly experienced pilots, navigators and bomb aimers.
Some experienced airmen returned to operations repeatedly at their own request and several are recorded to have flown 100-120 operations.
At the outbreak of war in September 1939 operational Royal Air Force bomber squadrons in Europe were equipped with two main categories of bombers, single-engined Fairey Battle and twin-engined Bristol Blenheim light bombers and Armstrong Whitworth Whitley, Vickers Wellington and Handley Page Hampden medium bombers [REF].
Pilot - A qualified pilot flew the aircraft and in the Royal Air Force was usually the captain (function not rank) of the crew, making the key operational decisions even if his rank was junior to other members of the crew [REF].
Second Pilot - A fully qualified, usually less experienced pilot who assisted the captain, who might assist the Observer and was usually a sergeant or commissioned officer.
Observer - The role was to navigate the bomber to the target using astral navigation, map reading, and wireless position fixes and then to release the payload onto the target.
Wireless Operator/Air Gunner - The role was to send and receive wireless signals during the flight, assisting the Observer with triangulation "fixes" to aid navigation when necessary and if attacked to use the defensive machine gun armament of the bomber to fight off enemy aircraft.
Fairey Battle single-engined light bomber - most often used in daylight operations in a ground support role and crewed by three airmen, a Pilot, an Observer and a Wireless Operator/Air Gunner.
Bristol Blenheim twin-engined light bomber - used in daylight or night operations and usually crewed by three airmen, a Pilot, an Observer and a Wireless Operator/Air Gunner in a dorsal power operated gun turret.
Handley Page Hampden twin-engined medium bomber - used normally in night operations and usually crewed by three or four airmen, a Pilot, a Second pilot or Observer, a Wireless Operator/Air Gunner and an Air Gunner.
The majority of RAF Bomber Command aircrew were aged 19 through to their mid-twenties although younger and considerably older airmen have been identified.
It is believed that William Wedgwood Benn DSO DFC father of Labour politician Tony Benn was the oldest man to fly operationally, he was born in 1877.
Possibly the youngest member of aircrew to be killed serving with an operational bomber squadron is Flight Sergeant Edward James Wright Royal Canadian Air Force who was killed aboard an Avro Lancaster of No. 428 Squadron RCAF on 30 April 1945 apparently aged 16 [REF].
RAF Bomber Command recognized the requirement for heavy bombers and brought into operational service the bombers usually associated with attacks on German targets in Europe.
The introduction of heavy bombers with four engines brought the necessity of engine management and a new trade entered service with these aircraft [REF].
"Air Bomber" more normally called the "Bomb Aimer".
In the middle years of World War II it became more usual to train airmen specifically as "Wireless Operators" and no longer add air gunnery training to their instruction.
Handley Page Halifax four-engined heavy bomber used primarily in night operations and usually crewed by seven airmen, a Pilot, a Flight Engineer, a Navigator, a Bomb Aimer, a Wireless Operator/Air Gunner, a Mid Upper gunner and a Rear Gunner.
Short Stirling four-engined heavy bomber used primarily in night operations and usually crewed by seven airmen, a Pilot, a Flight Engineer, a Navigator, a Bomb Aimer, a Wireless Operator/Air Gunner, a Mid Upper gunner and a Rear Gunner.
Avro Lancaster four-engined heavy bomber used normally in night operations and usually crewed by seven airmen, a Pilot, a Flight Engineer, a Navigator, a Bomb Aimer, a Wireless Operator/Air Gunner, a Mid Upper gunner and a Rear Gunner.
During the late period of World War II some bombers carrying out special duties began to carry additional specialized equipment for navigational and similar purposes.
McVeigh told Fortier of his plans to blow up a federal building, but Fortier declined to participate.
McVeigh began announcing that he had progressed from the "propaganda" phase to the "action" phase.
On April 19, 1995, McVeigh drove the truck to the front of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building just as its offices opened for the day.
McVeigh said that he had no knowledge that the federal offices also ran a daycare center on the second floor of the building, and that he might have chosen a different target if he had known about it [REF].
During an interview with Ed Bradley for television news magazine 60 Minutes in 2000, Bradley asked McVeigh for his reaction to the deaths of the nineteen children.
According to the Oklahoma City Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism (MIPT), more than 300 buildings were damaged.
In April 1993, McVeigh headed for a farm in Michigan where co-conspirator Terry Nichols lived.
McVeigh's anti-government rhetoric became more radical.
McVeigh dissociated himself from his boyhood friend, Steve Hodge, by sending a 23-page farewell letter to him.
McVeigh felt the need to personally reconnoiter sites of rumored conspiracies.
In May 1988, at the age of 20, McVeigh graduated from the U.S. Army Infantry School at Fort Benning, Georgia [REF].
McVeigh was awarded a Bronze Star medal for his service as a vehicle crewman in the Persian Gulf War.
McVeigh aspired to join the United States Army Special Forces (SF).
After leaving the army in 1992, McVeigh grew increasingly transient.
It is claimed that while visiting friends in Decker, Michigan, McVeigh complained that the Army had implanted a microchip into his buttocks so that the government could keep track of him [REF].
McVeigh worked long hours in a dead-end job and felt that he did not have a home.
McVeigh introduced his sister to anti-government literature, but his father had little interest in these views.
In 1993, he drove to Waco, Texas during the Waco siege to show his support.
For the five months following the Waco Siege, McVeigh worked at gun shows and handed out free cards printed up with Lon Horiuchi's name and address, "in the hope that somebody in the Patriot movement would assassinate the sharpshooter."
McVeigh became a fixture on the gun show circuit, traveling to forty states and visiting about eighty gun shows.
McVeigh claimed that the bombing was revenge against the government for the sieges at Waco, Texas and Ruby Ridge [REF].
McVeigh frequently quoted and alluded to the white supremacist novel The Turner Diaries
In a 1,200-word essay[REF] dated March 1998, from the federal maximum-security prison at Florence, Colorado, McVeigh claimed that the terrorist bombing was "morally equivalent" to U.S. military actions against Iraq and other foreign countries.
The administration has said that Iraq has no right to stockpile chemical or biological weapons ("weapons of mass destruction") - mainly because they have used them in the past.
Well, if that's the standard by which these matters are decided, then the U.S. is the nation that set the precedent.
The administration claims that Iraq has used these weapons in the past.
I suggest that one study the histories of World War I, World War II and other "regional conflicts" that the U.S. has been involved in to familiarize themselves with the use of "weapons of mass destruction." .
The truth is, the U.S. has set the standard when it comes to the stockpiling and use of weapons of mass destruction.
Hypocrisy when it comes to the death of children?
I find it ironic, to say the least, that one of the aircraft used to drop such a bomb on Iraq is dubbed "The Spirit of Oklahoma."
When a U.S. plane or cruise missile is used to bring destruction to a foreign people, this nation rewards the bombers with applause and praise.
Unfortunately, the morality of killing is not so superficial.
These are weapons of mass destruction - and the method of delivery matters little to those on the receiving end of such weapons.
Whether you wish to admit it or not, when you approve, morally, of the bombing of foreign targets by the U.S. military, you are approving of acts morally equivalent to the bombing in Oklahoma City .. .
McVeigh included photocopies of a famous Vietnam War-era picture showing terrified children fleeing napalm bombs, and of nuclear devastation in Japan.
On April 26, 2001, McVeigh wrote a letter to Fox News, I Explain Herein Why I Bombed the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, which explicitly laid out his reasons for the attack [REF].
McVeigh was born in Lockport, New York, the only son and the second of three children of Mildred "Mickey" Noreen (née Hill) and William McVeigh [REF].
McVeigh claimed to have been a target of bullying at school, and he took refuge in a fantasy world where he imagined retaliating against the bullies [REF].
While in high school, McVeigh became interested in computers and hacked into government computer systems on his Commodore 64, under the handle "The Wanderer", borrowed from the song by Dion DiMucci.
McVeigh was introduced to firearms by his grandfather.
By tracing the Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) of a rear axle found in the wreckage, the FBI identified the vehicle as a Ryder Rental box truck rented from Junction City, Kansas.
Shortly after the bombing, while driving on I-35 in Noble County, near Perry, Oklahoma, McVeigh was stopped by Oklahoma State Trooper Charles J. Hanger [REF].
On August 10, 1995, McVeigh was indicted on eleven federal counts, including conspiracy to use a weapon of mass destruction, use of a weapon of mass destruction, destruction with the use of explosives and eight counts of first-degree murder [REF].
On February 20, 1996, the Court granted a change of venue and ordered that the case be transferred from Oklahoma City to the U.S. District Court in Denver, Colorado, to be presided over by U.S. District Judge Richard Paul Matsch [REF].
McVeigh instructed his lawyers to use a necessity defense, but they ended up not doing so,[REF] because they would have had to prove that McVeigh was in "imminent danger" from the government.
On June 2, 1997, McVeigh was found guilty on all eleven counts of the federal indictment [REF].
On June 13, 1997, the jury recommended that McVeigh receive the death penalty [REF].
McVeigh's accomplice, Terry Nichols, was convicted and sentenced in federal court to life in prison for his role in the crime [REF].
An ATF informant, Carol Howe, told reporters that shortly before the bombing she had warned her handlers that guests of Elohim City, Oklahoma were planning a major bombing attack [REF].
In February 2004, the FBI announced it would review its investigation after learning that agents in the investigation of the Midwest Bank Robbers (an alleged Aryan-oriented gang) had turned up explosive caps of the same type that were used to trigger the Oklahoma City bomb [REF].
Some witnesses claimed to have seen a second suspect, and there was a search for a "John Doe #2", but none was ever found.
While imprisoned, McVeigh had the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) register # 12076-064 [REF].
I knew I wanted this before it happened.
McVeigh dropped his remaining appeals, saying that he would rather die than spend the rest of his life in prison [REF].
The execution date was reset for June 11, 2001.
McVeigh chose William Ernest Henley's poem "Invictus" as his final statement [REF].
On November 21, 1997, President Bill Clinton had signed S. 923, special legislation introduced by Senator Arlen Specter to bar McVeigh and other veterans convicted of capital crimes from being buried in any military cemetery [REF].
Psychiatrist John Smith concluded that McVeigh was "a decent person who had allowed rage to build up inside him to the point that he had lashed out in one terrible, violent act."[REF]
Stars condense from regions of space of higher density, yet those regions are less dense than within a vacuum chamber.
All stars spend the majority of their existence as main sequence stars, fueled primarily by the nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium within their cores.
Very low mass stars, with masses below 0.5 , are fully convective and distribute helium evenly throughout the whole star while on the main sequence.
Intermediate-mass stars, between and , pass through evolutionary stages similar to low mass stars, but after a relatively short period on the red giant branch they ignite helium without a flash and spend an extended period in the red clump before forming a degenerate carbon-oxygen core.
Massive stars generally have a minimum mass of (possibly as low as ).
As the cloud collapses, individual conglomerations of dense dust and gas form "Bok globules".
Early stars of less than 2 are called T Tauri stars, while those with greater mass are Herbig Ae/Be stars.
Early in their development, T Tauri stars follow the Hayashi track-they contract and decrease in luminosity while remaining at roughly the same temperature.
Most stars are observed to be members of binary star systems, and the properties of those binaries are the result of the conditions in which they formed [REF].
Stars spend about 90% of their existence fusing hydrogen into helium in high-temperature and high-pressure reactions near the core.
Every star generates a stellar wind of particles that causes a continual outflow of gas into space.
The time a star spends on the main sequence depends primarily on the amount of fuel it has and the rate at which it fuses it.
Besides mass, the elements heavier than helium can play a significant role in the evolution of stars.
As stars of at least 0.4 [REF] exhaust their supply of hydrogen at their core, they start to fuse hydrogen in a shell outside the helium core.
As the hydrogen shell burning produces more helium, the core increases in mass and temperature.
After the star has fused the helium of its core, the carbon product fuses producing a hot core with an outer shell of fusing helium.
During their helium-burning phase, a star of more than nine solar masses expands to form first a blue and then a red supergiant.
When helium is exhausted at the core of a massive star, the core contracts and the temperature and pressure rises enough to fuse carbon (see Carbon-burning process).
The final stage occurs when a massive star begins producing iron.
As a star's core shrinks, the intensity of radiation from that surface increases, creating such radiation pressure on the outer shell of gas that it will push those layers away, forming a planetary nebula.
In larger stars, fusion continues until the iron core has grown so large (more than 1.4 ) that it can no longer support its own mass.
A supernova explosion blows away the star's outer layers, leaving a remnant such as the Crab Nebula [REF].
The blown-off outer layers of dying stars include heavy elements, which may be recycled during the formation of new stars.
The post-main-sequence evolution of binary stars may be significantly different from the evolution of single stars of the same mass.
Almost everything about a star is determined by its initial mass, including such characteristics as luminosity, size, evolution, lifespan, and its eventual fate.
Most stars are between 1 billion and 10 billion years old.
The more massive the star, the shorter its lifespan, primarily because massive stars have greater pressure on their cores, causing them to burn hydrogen more rapidly.
When stars form in the present Milky Way galaxy they are composed of about 71% hydrogen and 27% helium,[REF] as measured by mass, with a small fraction of heavier elements.
The star with the lowest iron content ever measured is the dwarf HE1327-2326, with only 1/200,000th the iron content of the Sun [REF].
Due to their great distance from the Earth, all stars except the Sun appear to the unaided eye as shining points in the night sky that twinkle because of the effect of the Earth's atmosphere.
The disks of most stars are much too small in angular size to be observed with current ground-based optical telescopes, and so interferometer telescopes are required to produce images of these objects.
Stars range in size from neutron stars, which vary anywhere from 20 to in diameter, to supergiants like Betelgeuse in the Orion constellation, which has a diameter approximately 1,070 times that of the Sun-about .
The motion of a star relative to the Sun can provide useful information about the origin and age of a star, as well as the structure and evolution of the surrounding galaxy.
Radial velocity is measured by the doppler shift of the star's spectral lines, and is given in units of km/s.
When both rates of movement are known, the space velocity of the star relative to the Sun or the galaxy can be computed.
The magnetic field of a star is generated within regions of the interior where convective circulation occurs.
Young, rapidly rotating stars tend to have high levels of surface activity because of their magnetic field.
One of the most massive stars known is Eta Carinae,[REF] which, with 100-150 times as much mass as the Sun, will have a lifespan of only several million years.
The first stars to form after the Big Bang may have been larger, up to 300 ,[REF] due to the complete absence of elements heavier than lithium in their composition.
With a mass only 80 times that of Jupiter (), 2MASS J0523-1403 is the smallest known star undergoing nuclear fusion in its core [REF].
The combination of the radius and the mass of a star determines its surface gravity.
The rotation rate of stars can be determined through spectroscopic measurement, or more exactly determined by tracking their starspots.
Degenerate stars have contracted into a compact mass, resulting in a rapid rate of rotation.
The surface temperature of a main sequence star is determined by the rate of energy production of its core and by its radius, and is often estimated from the star's color index [REF].
The stellar temperature will determine the rate of ionization of various elements, resulting in characteristic absorption lines in the spectrum.
The concept of a constellation was known to exist during the Babylonian period.
As well as certain constellations and the Sun itself, individual stars have their own myths [REF].
Circa 1600, the names of the constellations were used to name the stars in the corresponding regions of the sky.
The only internationally recognized authority for naming celestial bodies is the International Astronomical Union (IAU) [REF].
A variety of nuclear fusion reactions take place in the cores of stars, that depend upon their mass and composition.
The hydrogen fusion process is temperature-sensitive, so a moderate increase in the core temperature will result in a significant increase in the fusion rate.
41H → 4He + 2e+ + 2γ + 2νe (26.7 MeV) .
where e+ is a positron, γ is a gamma ray photon, νe is a neutrino, and H and He are isotopes of hydrogen and helium, respectively.
In more massive stars, helium is produced in a cycle of reactions catalyzed by carbon called the carbon-nitrogen-oxygen cycle [REF].
34He → 12C + γ + 7.2 MeV .
In massive stars, heavier elements can also be burned in a contracting core through the neon burning process and oxygen burning process.
The example below shows the amount of time required for a star of 20 to consume all of its nuclear fuel.
Stars are not spread uniformly across the universe, but are normally grouped into galaxies along with interstellar gas and dust.
A multi-star system consists of two or more gravitationally bound stars that orbit each other.
It has been a long-held assumption that the majority of stars occur in gravitationally bound, multiple-star systems.
The nearest star to the Earth, apart from the Sun, is Proxima Centauri, which is 39.9 trillion kilometres, or 4.2 light-years.
Due to the relatively vast distances between stars outside the galactic nucleus, collisions between stars are thought to be rare.
The energy produced by stars, a product of nuclear fusion, radiates to space as both electromagnetic radiation and particle radiation.
The color of a star, as determined by the most intense frequency of the visible light, depends on the temperature of the star's outer layers, including its photosphere [REF].
Using the stellar spectrum, astronomers can also determine the surface temperature, surface gravity, metallicity and rotational velocity of a star.
The luminosity of a star is the amount of light and other forms of radiant energy it radiates per unit of time.
Patches of the star's surface with a lower temperature and luminosity than average are known as starspots.
The apparent brightness of a star is expressed in terms of its apparent magnitude.
On both apparent and absolute magnitude scales, the smaller the magnitude number, the brighter the star; the larger the magnitude number, the fainter the star.
Relative to both luminosity and distance from Earth, a star's absolute magnitude (M) and apparent magnitude (m) are not equivalent;[REF] for example, the bright star Sirius has an apparent magnitude of −1.44, but it has an absolute magnitude of +1.41.
The Sun has an apparent magnitude of −26.7, but its absolute magnitude is only +4.83.
As of 2006, the star with the highest known absolute magnitude is LBV 1806-20, with a magnitude of −14.2.
The current stellar classification system originated in the early 20th century, when stars were classified from A to Q based on the strength of the hydrogen line [REF].
Stars are given a single-letter classification according to their spectra, ranging from type O, which are very hot, to M, which are so cool that molecules may form in their atmospheres.
In addition, stars may be classified by the luminosity effects found in their spectral lines, which correspond to their spatial size and is determined by their surface gravity.
Additional nomenclature, in the form of lower-case letters added to the end of the spectral type to indicate peculiar features of the spectrum.
White dwarf stars have their own class that begins with the letter D. This is further sub-divided into the classes DA, DB, DC, DO, DZ, and DQ, depending on the types of prominent lines found in the spectrum.
As atomic nuclei are fused in the core, they emit energy in the form of gamma rays.
In addition to hydrostatic equilibrium, the interior of a stable star will also maintain an energy balance of thermal equilibrium.
The radiation zone is the region of the stellar interior where the flux of energy outward is dependent on radiative heat transfer, since convective heat transfer is inefficient in that zone.
The occurrence of convection in the outer envelope of a main sequence star depends on the star's mass.
The photosphere is that portion of a star that is visible to an observer.
Above the level of the photosphere is the stellar atmosphere.
From the corona, a stellar wind of plasma particles expands outward from the star, until it interacts with the interstellar medium.
Variable stars have periodic or random changes in luminosity because of intrinsic or extrinsic properties.
During their stellar evolution, some stars pass through phases where they can become pulsating variables.
Eruptive variables are stars that experience sudden increases in luminosity because of flares or mass ejection events [REF].
Cataclysmic or explosive variable stars are those that undergo a dramatic change in their properties.
Stars can also vary in luminosity because of extrinsic factors, such as eclipsing binaries, as well as rotating stars that produce extreme starspots [REF].
Historically, stars have been important to civilizations throughout the world.
The oldest accurately dated star chart was the result of ancient Egyptian astronomy in 1534 BC [REF].
The first star catalogue in Greek astronomy was created by Aristillus in approximately 300 BC, with the help of Timocharis [REF].
In spite of the apparent immutability of the heavens, Chinese astronomers were aware that new stars could appear [REF].
Medieval Islamic astronomers gave Arabic names to many stars that are still used today and they invented numerous astronomical instruments that could compute the positions of the stars.
The Italian astronomer Geminiano Montanari recorded observing variations in luminosity of the star Algol in 1667.
William Herschel was the first astronomer to attempt to determine the distribution of stars in the sky.
The science of stellar spectroscopy was pioneered by Joseph von Fraunhofer and Angelo Secchi.
The first direct measurement of the distance to a star (61 Cygni at 11.4 light-years) was made in 1838 by Friedrich Bessel using the parallax technique.
Important theoretical work on the physical structure of stars occurred during the first decades of the twentieth century.
With the exception of supernovae, individual stars have primarily been observed in the Local Group,[REF] and especially in the visible part of the Milky Way (as demonstrated by the detailed star catalogues available for our galaxy) [REF].
Although stellar parameters can be expressed in SI units or CGS units, it is often most convenient to express mass, luminosity, and radii in solar units, based on the characteristics of the Sun.
The solar mass M⊙ was not explicitly defined by the IAU due to the large relative uncertainty (10−4) of the Newtonian gravitational constant G.
However, one can combine the nominal solar mass parameter with the most recent (2014) CODATA estimate of the Newtonian gravitational constant G to derive the solar mass to be approximately 1.9885 × 1030 kg.
Large lengths, such as the radius of a giant star or the semi-major axis of a binary star system, are often expressed in terms of the astronomical unit - approximately equal to the mean distance between the Earth and the Sun (150 million km or approximately 93 million miles).
The 1930s saw the demise of many auto makers due to the economic effects of the Great Depression, stiff competition from the Big Three, and/or mismanagement.
Major technological innovations were introduced or were widely adopted during the 1930s, such as synchromesh manual transmissions, semi-automatic transmissions, automatic transmissions, hydraulic brakes, independent front suspension, and overhead-valve engines.
When the U.S. entered World War II, all domestic passenger automobile production ceased by February 1942.
The 2000s began with a recession in early 2001 and the effects of the September 11 attacks, significantly affecting auto industry sales and profitability.
In 2005, oil prices began rising and peaked in 2008.
The Automotive industry crisis of 2008-10 happened when the Big Three were in weak financial condition and the beginning of an economic recession, and the financial crisis resulted in the automakers looking to the federal government for help.
The CEOs of the Big Three requested government aid in November 2008, but sentiment in Congress was against the automakers, especially after it was revealed that they had flown to Washington D.C. on their private corporate jets.
The Automotive Task Force requested that GM CEO Rick Wagoner resign (although he was replaced by another long-time GM executive, Frederick Henderson).
Ford did not request any government assistance, but as part of their downsizing sold Volvo in 2010 and phased out their Mercury division in 2011.
The development of self-powered vehicles was accompanied by numerous technologies and components giving rise to numerous supplier firms and associated industries.
Originally purchased by wealthy individuals, by 1916 cars began selling at $875 (US$ in dollars ) Soon, the market widened with the mechanical betterment of the cars, the reduction in prices, as well as the introduction of installment sales and payment plans.
] The practicality of the automobile was initially limited because of the lack of suitable roads.
State governments began to use the corvee system to maintain roads, an implementation of required physical labor on a public project on the local citizens.
The other reason was the weight of the wartime vehicles.
The Federal Aid Road Act of 1916 allocated $75 million for building roads.
The only major auto companies to survive the Great Depression were General Motors Corporation, Ford Motor Company, Chrysler Corporation, Hudson Motor Car Company, Nash-Kelvinator Corporation, Packard Motor Car Company, Studebaker Corporation, and Crosley Motors.
Crosley Motors ceased auto production in 1952.
Kaiser-Frazer Corporation was started in 1945 and acquired Willys-Overland Motors (maker of the Jeep) in 1953.
In 1954, Nash-Kelvinator and Hudson merged to form American Motors (AMC).
Periodically, other entrepreneurs would found automobile companies, but most would soon fail and none achieved major sales success.
The 1990s began the decade in a recession, which resulted in weak auto sales and operating losses.
The automakers also continued their trend of purchasing or investing in foreign automakers.
While the American automakers were investing in or buying foreign competitors, the foreign automakers continued to establish more production facilities in the United States.
In 1998, Chrysler and the German automaker Daimler-Benz entered into a "merger of equals" although in reality it turned out be an acquisition by Daimler-Benz.
In the early 1900s, the U.S. saw the rise of the Big Three automakers; Ford, GM, and Chrysler.
Henry Ford began building cars in 1896 and started his own company in 1903.
General Motors Corporation (GM), the company that would soon become the world's largest automaker, was founded in 1908 by William Durant.
Walter Chrysler was formerly president of Buick and an executive of GM.
General Motors wanted automobiles to be status symbols and illustrate a defined social class structure.
Ford and General Motors each had their own impact on social status and the type of market they were targeting.
Big changes were taking place in automobile development in the 1960s, with the Big Three dominating the industry.
Imported vehicles grew during the 1950s and 1960s - from a very low base.
The compact Nash Rambler had been around since 1950, and American Motors Corporation (AMC) expanded into a range of smaller cars than were offered by the Big Three.
The four-seat 1958 Ford Thunderbird (second generation) was arguably the first personal luxury car, which became a large market segment [REF].
Pony cars were introduced with the Ford Mustang in 1964.
While the personal luxury, pony, and muscle cars got most of the attention, the full sized cars formed the bulk of auto sales in the 1960s, helped by low oil prices.
In 1981, Japanese automakers entered into a so-called "Voluntary restraint agreement" limiting the number of autos that they could import to the U.S. to 1.68 million per year [REF].
Despite the financial and marketing upheavals during the 1970s and 1980s, the decades led to technological innovations and/or widespread use of such improvements as disc brakes, fuel injection, electronic engine control units, and electronic ignition.
By the mid-1980s, oil prices had fallen sharply, helping lead to the revitalization of the American auto industry.
Beginning in 1972, bumpers were required to be reinforced to meet 5-mph impact standards, a decision that was revised in 1982.
With the Clean Air Act (United States) of 1963 and the Vehicle Air Pollution and Control Act of 1965, emission controls began being instituted in 1968.
During his first term as EPA Administrator, William Ruckelshaus spent 60% of his time on the automobile industry, whose emissions were to be reduced 90% under the 1970 Clean Air Act after senators became frustrated at the industry's failure to cut emissions under previous, weaker air laws [REF].
By 1969, imports had increased their share of the U.S. auto market, with Volkswagen selling 548,904 vehicles, followed by Toyota with 127,018 vehicles.
The auto industry was severely affected by the 1973 oil crisis Arab embargo.
General Motors began responding first to the high gas prices by downsizing most of their models by 1977.
As bold and confident as the Big Three automakers were in the 1950s and 1960s, the American auto makers in the 1970s and 1980s stumbled badly, going from one engineering, manufacturing, or marketing disaster to another.
1818 - Mr. Dunlop, British Collector of Kaira took over the city and thus came the end of Maratha rule, Union Jack hoisted on Bhadra.
1819 - Rann of Kutch earthquake
1820 - First import of foreign cloth.
1821 - Earthquake for 30 seconds.
1824 - First survey of the city.
1827 - Establishment of first Gujarati School.
1832 - Repairs to city walls by citizens' committee, first seeds of local self Government.
1834 - Beginning of city committee for municipal work.
1846 - Starting of First English School.
1847 - Construction of First Water Tank by city committee and municipal work started.
1848 - Construction of Hatheesing Temple.
1850 - Construction of the Shri Swaminarayan Mandir, Ahmedabad.
1857 - Ahmedabad Municipality came into existence on 19 January.
1861 - First Textile Mill started by late Mr. Ranchhodlal Chhotalal, the pioneer of Mill Industry.
1863 - Construction of Railway Station.
1864 - Railway between Ahmedabad and Bombay.
1870 - Opening of Ellisbridge.
1872 - Construction of first city road - Gandhi Road.
1873 - Ahmedabad Municipality recognized by statute and named as City Municipality.
1875 - Railway bridge and Ellisbridge were damaged by heavy floods.
1881 - B.J. Medical College started near Gheekanta.
1888 - Calico Mills was started by Sheth Karamchand Premchand.
1890 - The Czar of Russia came to Ahmedabad.
1897 - Opening ceremony of Gujarat College by Lord Sandhurst.
1898 - Death of Sheth Ranchhodlal Chhotalal.
1951 - L. D. Engineering College started, North Gujarat Electric Grid Scheme Commissioned.
1952 - First general elections under the new Constitution giving adult franchise, First elections to Corporation.
1954 - Atira Laboratory building opened by Jawaharlal Nehru.
1957 - Second General Elections and second Corporation election.
1960 - 1 May 1960 - Ahmedabad becomes the capital of newly state Gujarat state.
1961 - Opening of Indian Institute of Management, National Institute of Design.
1963 - Opening of Nagari Eye Hospital by Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.
1966 - Opening of Dr. Vikram Sarabhai Community Science Centre.
1974 - Nav Nirman Andolan by students.
1993 - Municipal Corporation Superseded for the implementation of 74th Amendment and Administrator appointed.
1994 - Several administrative reforms and strict actions initiated by the Corporation to improve its financial position.
1999 - Widening of Sardar Bridge, Renovation of Tagore Hall, Renovation of Town Hall.
2000 - Widening of Gandhi Bridge, Widening of Ellis Bridge, Publication of Citizen's Charter for the first time, Inauguration of the ambitious Raska Water Project.
1074 - Karna of Chaulukya dynasty won Aashavalli and established Karnavati.
1094 to 1143 - Shantuvihar and Udayvihar are constructed.
1284 - The group of Mandap Durg's Zanzan visited Karnavati.
1297 - Allauddin Khilji won Gujarat.
1299 - Khilji's Army destroyed Doms and Temples of Aashavalli.
1411 - On the banks of Sabarmati River, Sultan Ahmed Shah I laid the foundation of Ahmedabad, Manek Burj and Manek Chowk, Ganeshbari, Bhadra Fort, Muhurt Pol and Jama Masjid.
1413 - Construction of Bhadra Fort completed.
1423 - Construction of Jama Masjid, Ahmedabad completed.
1441 - Death of Sheikh Ahmed Khatu and construction of the historical Sarkhej Roza begun.
1451 - Houj-E-Kutub or Kankaria Lake constructed.
1453 - Daria Khan's Tomb and dome constructed.
1454 - Construction of Shaking Minarets of Sidi Bashir Mosque near Gomtipur.
1485 - Dada Harir Stepwell constructed.
1486 - Construction of city walls by Mehmud Begada.
1498 - Adalaj Stepwell with exquisite stone carving.
1514 - Arrival of Spanish traveler Barbosa and construction of Rani Sipri Masjid.
1535 - Humayun captured Ahmedabad and ruled for nine months.
1555 - Arrival of Arabian historian Udadbir.
1572 - Sidi Saiyyed mosque with the world-famous carved stone tree constructed.
1572 - Akbar captured the city, end of the sultanate.
1586 - Meeting of Sant Dadu and Akbar, Akbar recaptured the city from Muzaffarshah.
1910 - Municipality Suspended First Time.
1913 - Electricity Company started.
1915 - Arrival of Mohandas K. Gandhi.
1916 - Establishment of Satyagrah(Sabarmati) Ashram.
1921 - Gujarat Vidyapeeth, founded by Mahatma Gandhi, Sessions of the Indian National Congress.
1922 - Arrest of Mahatma Gandhi, sentenced to six years jail for treason.
1924 - Elected Ahmedabad Municipality resumed its working, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel becomes President of the Municipality.
1926 - Ahmedabad Municipality becomes Barrough Municipality.
1929 - Opening of Sir.
1930 - Mahatma Gandhiji's historic 'Dandi March' and Salt Satyagraha.
1931 - Vadilal Sarabhai General Hospital Started.
1938 - Opening of M.J. Library.
1939 - Opening of Sardar Bridge.
1940 - Opening of Gandhi Bridge and Infections Disease Hospital.
1942 - Quit India movement.
1946 - Second Communal riot.
1947 - Bus Transport Service under Municipal control, Independence day celebrated.
1948 - Immersion of Mahatmaji's ashes in Sabarmati, Preparations for Electric Grid Scheme and expansion of Power House, Famine conditions in Ahmedabad District.
1949 - Ahmedabad Station of All India Radio started, Gujarat Chamber of Commerce established.
1708 - Invasion by Balaji Vishwanath, Ahmedabad looted, truce set at a price of Rs. 1,20,000.
1725 - Invasion by Marathas, persuaded to go back by hushmoney.
1731 - Arrival of Peshwa Bajirao II.
1732 - City sufferes from famine.
1733 - Library of Rasulabad looted.
1738 - Treaty between Mughal Suba of Ahmedabad Momin Khan and Damaji Gaikwad, city came under joint jurisdiction.
1744 - Death of Gujarati Poet Shamal Bhatt.
1753 - Ahmedabad came under Maratha rule.
1757 - Division of Ahmedabad between Gaekwad and Peshwa.
1758 - The city recaptured by Maratha after a year-long blockade on 27 February 1758.
1779-80 - General Goddard took over the city during First Anglo-Maratha War and handed it over to Fatehsinh Gaekwad under treaty of Salbai.
1614 - Arrival of the first representative of the British East India Company.
1618 - Arrival of Jehangir,letters written to the British King James.
1621 - Shah Jahan constructed Shahibag Palace (presently Commissioner's Bungalow) and the Shahi Gardern.
1636 - Bhadra palace constructed by Suba Azamkhan.
1638 - Arrival of Johan Albrecht de Mandelslo
1644 - Aurangzeb becomes the subahdar (Governor) of Ahmedabad.
1658 - Aurangzeb ascended the throne at Delhi.
1664 - Revenue concessions to Europeans, Arrival of Tavernier.
1683 - City flooded up to Teen Darwaza due to flood.
2001 - Earthquake on Republic Day (near Bhuj) creates major damage across the western part of city, leaving over 750 dead and 4000 injured, many of them residents of tall buildings.
2006 - Floods in Sabarmati after 1992, little damage to sabarmati riverfront project.
2009 - BRTS (janmarg) starts its function in city and gained award of most sustainable transport service.
2010 - Ahmedabad completes 600 years of its establishment on 26 February.
2012 - The Times of India chose Ahmedabad as the best city to live in India.
The skyscraper (usually defined as a building over 40 stories high)[REF] first appeared in Chicago in the 1890s, and was largely an American style in the mid 20th century, but in the 21st century skyscrapers were found in almost every large city on every continent.
The Burj Khalifa in Dubai, United Arab Emirates is the tallest structure in the world, standing at [REF].
Adrian Smith and his own firm are the architects for the building which, in 2020, will replace the Burj-Khalifa as the tallest building in the world.
After the destruction of the twin towers of the World Trade Center in the September 11 terrorist attacks, a new trade center was designed, with the main tower designed by David Childs of SOM.
In London, one of the most notable contemporary landmarks is 30 St Mary Axe, popularly known as "The Gherkin", designed by Norman Foster (2004).
The tallest building in Moscow is the Mercury City Tower in Moscow, designed by the American architect Frank Williams with Mikhail Posokhin and Gennadiy Sirota.
The tallest building in China as of 2015 is the Shanghai Tower by the U.S. architectural and design firm of Gensler.
Most skyscrapers are designed to express modernity; the most notable exception is the Abraj Al Bait, a complex of seven skyscraper hotels build by the government of Saudi Arabia to house pilgrims coming the holy shrine of Mecca.
A tendency is contemporary residential architecture, particularly in the rebuilding of older neighborhoods in large cities, is the luxury condominium tower, with very expensive apartments for sale designed by "starchitects", that is, internationally famous architects.
Daniel Libeskind (born 1946), was born in Poland and studied, taught and practiced architecture in the United States.
One cheerful feature of contemporary residential architecture is color
Another contemporary tendency is the conversion of industrial buildings into mixed residential communities.
The Isbjerget, Danish for "iceberg", in Aarhus, Denmark (2013), is a group of four buildings with 210 apartments, both rented and owned, for residents with a range of incomes, located on the waterfront of a former industrial port in Denmark.
A growing tendency in the 21st century is eco-architecture, also termed sustainable architecture; buildings with features which conserve heat and energy, and sometimes produce their own energy through solar cells and windmills, and use solar heat to generate solar hot water.
Many urban skyscrapers such as 30 Saint Mary Axe in London use a double skin of glass to conserve energy.
BedZED, designed by British architect Bill Dunster, is an entire community of eighty-two homes in Hackbridge, near London, built according to eco-architecture principles.
The CaixaForum Madrid is a museum and cultural center in Paseo del Prado 36, Madrid, by the Swiss architects Herzog & de Meuron, built between 2001 and 2007, is an example of both green architecture and recycling.
Unusual materials are sometimes recycled for use in eco-architecture; they include denim from old blue jeans for insulation, and panels made from paper flakes, baked earth, flax, sisal, or coconut, and particularly fast-growing bamboo.
Some of the most striking and innovative works of contemporary architecture are art museums, which are often examples of sculptural architecture, and are the signature works of major architects.
The Walker Art Center in Minneapolis (2005), was designed by the Swiss architects Herzog and de Meuron, who designed the Tate Modern museum in London, and who won the Pritzker Architecture Prize, the most prestigious award in architecture, in 2001.
The Polish-born American architect Daniel Libeskind (born 1946) is one of the most prolific of contemporary museum architects, He was an academic before he began designing buildings, and was one of the early proponents of the architectural theory of Deconstructivism.
The De Young Museum in San Francisco was designed by the Swiss architects Herzog & de Meuron.
The Zentrum Paul Klee by Renzo Piano is an art museum near Berne Switzerland located next to an autoroute in the Swiss countryside.
The Centre Pompidou-Metz, in Metz, France, (2010), a branch of the Centre Pompidou museum of modern art in Paris, was designed by Shigeru Ban, a Japanese architect who won the Pritzker Prize for Architecture in 2014.
The Louis Vuitton Foundation by Frank Gehry (2014) is gallery of contemporary art located adjacent to the Bois de Boulogne in Paris was opened in October 2014.
The new Whitney Museum of American Art in New York City by Renzo Piano (2015) took a very different approach from the sculptural museums of Frank Gehry.
The San Francisco Museum of Modern Art is actually two buildings by different architects fit together; an earlier (1995) five-story postmodernist structure by the Swiss architect Mario Botta, to which has been joined a much larger ten-story white gallery by the Norwegian-based firm of Snøhetta (2016).
Several of the most prominent contemporary architects, including Norman Foster, Santiago Calatrava, Zaha Hadid, have turned their attention to designing bridges.
The British-Iraqi architect Zaha Hadid constructed the Bridge Pavilion in Zaragoza.
Some smaller new bridges also offer simple but very innovative designs.
The shopping malls are the elephants of commercial architecture, massive structures which combine retail stores, food outlets, and entertainment under a single roof.
In competition with shopping malls are downtown department stores and shops of individual designer brands.
Designer brand shops try make their logo visible and to set themselves apart from department stores.
Surprisingly few contemporary churches were built between 2000 and 2017.
The Northern Lights Cathedral, by the Denmark-based international firm of Schmidt, Hammer and Lassen, is located in Alta, Norway, one of northernmost cities in the world.
The Vrindavan Chandrodaya Mandir is a Hindu Temple in Vrindivan, in Uttar Pradesh state in India, which was under construction at the end of 2016.
One of the most unusual contemporary churches is St. Jude's Anglican Cathedral in Iqaluit, the capital of Nunavut, the northernmost and least populous region of Canada.
Anothet unusual contemporary church is the Cardboard Cathedral in Christchurch, New Zealand designed by Japanese architect Shigeru Ban.
Santiago Calatrava designed the Auditorio de Tenerife he concert hall of Tenerife, the major city of the Canary Islands.
The Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles (2003) is one of the major works by California architect Frank Gehry The exterior is stainless steel, formed like the sails of sailboats.
The Casa da Musica in Porto, Portugal, by the Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas (2005) is unique among concert halls in having two walls made entirely of glass.
The interior of the Copenhagen Opera House by Henning Larsen (2005) has an oak floor and maple walls to enhance hat acoustics.
The Schermerhorn Symphony Center in Nashville, Tennessee, by David M. Schwarz & Earl Swensson (2006), is an example of Neo-Classical architecture, borrowed literally from Roman and Greek models.
The Philharmonie de Paris by French architect Jean Nouvel opened in 2015.
The Elbphilharmonie concert hall in Hamburg, Germany, by Herzog & de Meuron, which was inaugurated in January, 2017, is the tallest inhabited building in the city, with a height of 110 meters (360 ft).
The Swiss architects Jacques Herzog and Pierre de Meuron designed the Allianz Arena in Munich, Germany, completed in 2005.
Among the most prestigious projects and best-known projects in contemporary architecture are the stadiums for the Olympic Games, whose architects are chosen by highly publicized international competitions.
The National Stadium in Kaohsiung, Taiwan by Japanese architect Toyo Ito (2009), is the form of a dragon.
Government buildings, once almost universally serious and sober looking, usually in variations of the school of neoclassical architecture, began to appear in more sculptural and even whimsical forms.
Some new government buildings, such as the Parliament House, Valletta, Malta by Renzo Piano (2015) created controversy because of the contrast between their style and the historic architecture around them [REF].
Most new government buildings attempt to express solidity and seriousness; an exception is the Port Authority (Havenhuis) in Antwerp, Belgium by Zaha Hadid (2016), where a ship-like structure of glass and steel on a white concrete perch seems to have landed atop the old port building constructed in 1922.
Before 1974 the area of Greater Manchester was split between Cheshire and Lancashire with numerous parts being independent county boroughs.
SELNEC had been proposed by the Redcliffe-Maud Report of 1969 as a "metropolitan area".
In 1969 a SELNEC Passenger Transport Authority was set up, which covered an area smaller than the proposed SELNEC, but different from the eventual Greater Manchester.
Although the Redcliffe-Maud report was rejected by the Conservative Party government after it won the 1970 general election, it was committed to local government reform, and accepted the need for a county based on Manchester.
Greater Manchester's representative county council was abolished in 1986, following the Local Government Act 1985.
By the 16th century the wool trade had made Manchester a flourishing market town.
The English Reformation resulted in the collegiate church being refounded as a Protestant institution.
The town's growth was given further impetus in 1620 with the start of fustian weaving.
Lord Strange returned and attempted to besiege the town, which had no permanent fortifications.
During the Commonwealth, Manchester was granted a seat in Parliament for the first time.
On the English Restoration in 1660, as a reprisal for its defence of the Parliamentarian cause, Manchester was deprived of its recently granted Members of Parliament.
Humphrey Chetham purchased the old college buildings after the civil war, and endowed it as a bluecoat school.
Despite the political setbacks, the town continued to prosper.
About this time, Defoe described the place as "the greatest mere village in England", by which he meant that a place the size of a populous market town had no form of local government to speak of, and was still subject to the whims of a lord of the manor.
In 1745, Charles Edward Stuart and his army entered Manchester en route to London.
The prosperity from the textile industry led to an expansion of Manchester and the surrounding conurbation.
This wealth fuelled the development of science and education in Manchester.
The growth of city government continued with Manchester finally being incorporated as a borough in 1838, covering what is now the city centre, along with Cheetham, Beswick, Ardwick, Chorlton upon Medlock and Hulme.
In 1841, Robert Angus Smith took up work as an analytical chemist at the Royal Manchester Institution and started to research the unprecedented environmental problems.
Manchester continued to be a nexus of political radicalism.
In 1846 the Borough bought the manorial rights from the Mosley family and the granting of city status followed in 1853.
In 1847 the Manchester diocese of the Church of England was established.
In 1851, the Borough became the first local authority to seek water supplies beyond its boundaries.
By 1853, the number of cotton mills in Manchester had reached its peak of 108 [REF].
The Cooperative Wholesale Society was formed in 1863 [REF].
The outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 saw an immediate shortage of cotton and the ensuing cotton famine brought enormous distress to the area until the war ended in 1865.
The first Trades Union Congress was held in Manchester (at the Mechanics' Institute, David Street), from 2 to 6 June 1868.
Manchester's golden age was perhaps the last quarter of the 19th century.
During the late 19th century Manchester began to suffer an economic decline, partly exacerbated by its reliance on the Port of Liverpool, which was charging excessive dock usage fees.
Trafford Park in Stretford (outside the city boundaries) was the world's first industrial estate and still exists today, though with a significant tourist and recreational presence.
Manchester remained a small market town until the late 18th century, and the beginning of the Industrial Revolution.
Indeed, it was the importing of cotton, which began towards the end of the 18th century, that revolutionised the textile industry in the area.
Manchester now developed as the natural distribution centre for raw cotton and spun yarn, and a marketplace and distribution centre for the products of this growing textile industry.
The city had one of the first telephone exchanges in Europe (possibly the first in the UK) when in 1879 one was opened on Faulkner Street in the city centre using the Bell patent system [REF].
Prehistoric evidence of human activity in the area of Manchester is limited, although scattered stone tools have been found [REF].
There is evidence of Bronze Age activity around Manchester in the form of burial sites [REF].
For the important prehistoric farm site at Oversley Farm, see History of Cheshire.
Manchester was administratively part of the Salford Hundred which was created after the Norman conquest [REF].
Manchester's entry in the Domesday Book reads "the Church of St Mary and the Church of St Michael hold one carucate of land in Manchester exempt from all customary dues except tax" [REF].
There was a castle in Manchester overlooking the rivers Irk and Irwell, where Chetham's School of Music stands today [REF].
The first lord of the manor to actually live in Manchester was Robert Grelley (1174-1230); his presence led to an influx of skilled workers, such as stonemasons and carpenters, associated with the construction of the manor house [REF].
The medieval town's defences incorporated the rivers Irk and Irwell on two sides and a long ditch on the others.
In the 14th century Manchester became home to a community of Flemish weavers, who settled in the town to produce wool and linen.
Thomas de la Warre was a Lord of the Manor and also a priest.
Thomas also gave the site of the old manor house as a residence for the priests.
By 1900 the Manchester city region was the 9th most populous in the world [REF].
In 1931 the population of Manchester reached an all-time peak of 766,311.
Significant changes in this period were the move of the Manchester Royal Infirmary from Piccadilly in 1908 and the building of a new public library and town hall extension in the 1930s.
In the Second World War Manchester played a key role as an industrial manufacturing city, including the Avro aircraft factory (now BAE Systems) which built countless aircraft for the RAF, the most famous being the Avro Lancaster bomber.
The Royal Exchange ceased trading in 1968.
The 1950s saw the start of Manchester's rise as a football superpower.
Mancunian Films had been established by John E. Blakeley in the 1930s as a vehicle for northern comedians such as George Formby and Frank Randle.
The same period saw the rise to national celebrity of local stars from the Granada TV soap opera Coronation Street, which was first aired on ITV in December 1960 and remains on air more than 50 years later.
The city also attracted international media and public attention for the success of its two senior football clubs - Manchester United and Manchester City.
Manchester United had won two league titles and an FA Cup in the first two decades of the 20th century, but the inter-war years had been blighted by a loss of form on the pitch and ongoing financial problems.
Manchester City had been league champions once and FA Cup winners twice by 1939, but enjoyed further success in the post-war years, starting with an FA Cup win in 1956.
As with many British cities during the period.
Manchester's key role in the industrial revolution was repeated and the city became a centre of research and development.
In the late 1950s, Manchester was chosen as a test ground for a new telephone service which formed the foundations of what we now know of as mobile phone technology.
In 1974, Manchester was split from the county of Lancashire, and the Metropolitan Borough of Manchester was created.
The diversification of the city's economy helped to cushion the blow of this decline.
During the 1980s, with the demise of many traditional industries under the radical economic restructuring often known as Thatcherism, the city and region experienced some decline.
At 11.20 am on Saturday 15 June 1996, the IRA detonated a large bomb in the city centre, the largest to be detonated on British soil.
The town of Manchester (as it was then) was granted a charter in 1301 by Thomas de Grelley, Baron of Manchester, who was also the Lord of the Manor of Manchester [REF].
Until the 19th century, Manchester was one of the many townships in the ancient parish of Manchester which covered a wider area than today's metropolitan borough.
In 1792 commissioners, usually known as police commissioners, were established for the improvement of the Township of Manchester.
On 11 December 1840, the Manchester Poor Law Union was formally declared and took responsibility for the administration and funding of the Poor Law in the area [REF].
In 1853 the Borough was elevated to city status.
By the Local Government Act 1888, the City of Manchester became in 1889 a county borough, although it still kept the city title [REF].
In addition to these areas, in 1931 the Cheshire civil parishes of Baguley, Northenden and Northen Etchells were also added to the City of Manchester [REF].
Under the Local Government Act 1972, the City of Manchester, with the addition of the civil parish of Ringway, became on 1 April 1974 one of the ten Metropolitan Boroughs of the newly created Metropolitan County of Greater Manchester.
In 1986 Greater Manchester County Council was abolished by the Local Government Act 1985 and most of its functions were devolved to the ten boroughs, making them effectively unitary authorities.
In one of its most noted acts Manchester City Council carried a resolution in 1980 to create the UK's first Nuclear Free Zone [REF][REF] The Peace Gardens were later constructed on a small piece of land in St. Peters Square.
At the beginning of the 19th century, Manchester was still governed by a court leet on the medieval model, and a Boroughreeve was responsible for law and order during the daylight hours.
The end of the 18th century saw the first serious recession in the textile trade.
Protest turned to bloodshed in the summer of 1819.
The Manchester Guardian, a newspaper with a radical agenda, was established shortly afterwards.
The growth of the city was matched by expansion of its transport links.
One of the world's first public omni bus services began in 1824
In 1830, Manchester was again at the forefront of transport technology with the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, the world's first steam passenger railway.
In 2002, the city hosted the XVII Commonwealth Games very successfully, earning praise from many previously sceptical sources.
In the 1990s, Manchester earned a reputation for gang-related crime, particularly after a spate of shootings involving young men, and reports of teenagers carrying handguns as "fashion accessories".
The Canal Street area of the city is well known as the "Gay Village".
During the 1980s, the Victoria University of Manchester had somewhat complacently exploited its reputation as one of the leading red brick universities.
Since the regeneration after the 1996 IRA bomb, and aided by the XVII Commonwealth Games, Manchester's city centre has changed significantly.
In January 2007, the independent Casino Advisory Panel awarded Manchester a licence to build the only supercasino in the UK to regenerate the Eastlands area of the city,[REF] but in March the House of Lords rejected the decision by three votes rendering previous House of Commons acceptance meaningless.
Parts of the city centre were affected by rioting by Rangers fans during the 2008 UEFA Cup Final riots.
As of 2011, Manchester and Salford are on a tentative list for UNESCO World Heritage Site status [REF].
On Tuesday 9 August, the centres of Manchester and Salford were affected by the 2011 England riots.
Rachael Ray joins Anne Burrell to host season 7. The winner earns a $50,000 donation for their chosen charity.
(RUNNER-UP) The contestant was the runner-up in the finals of the competition.
(WIN) The contestant did the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge or Skill Drill and was considered the winner.
(BTM) The contestant was selected as one of the bottom entries in the Main Dish challenge, but was not eliminated.
(OUT) The contestant lost that week's Main Dish challenge and was out of the competition.
Rachael Ray returns with Anne Burrell to host season 2 of the Celebrity Edition.
(RUNNER-UP) The contestant was the runner-up in the finals of the competition.
(WIN) The contestant did the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge or Skill Drill and was considered the winner.
(TIE) The contestant tied with another contestant as the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge or Skill Drill.
(BTM) The contestant was selected as one of the bottom entries in the Main Dish challenge but was not eliminated.
(OUT) The contestant lost that week's Main Dish challenge and was out of the competition.
Chefs Beau MacMillan and Anne Burrell lead an intense culinary boot camp.
Twelve chefs competed in the first season of Worst Cooks in America.
(RUNNER-UP) The contestant was the runner-up in the finals of the competition.
(WIN) The contestant did the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge and was considered the winner.
(BTM) The contestant was selected as one of the bottom entries in the Main Dish challenge, but was not eliminated.
(OUT) The contestant lost that week's Main Dish challenge and was out of the competition.
* Initially a member of the other team but switched after Chef Beau won the bet on whose team member made the best crepes.
Anne Burrell and Bobby Flay hosted season 3 [REF].
(RUNNER-UP) The contestant was the runner-up in the finals of the competition.
(WIN) The contestant did the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge and was considered the winner.
(BTM) The contestant was selected as one of the bottom entries in the Main Dish challenge, but was not eliminated.
(RUNNER-UP) The contestant was the runner-up in the finals of the competition.
(WIN) The contestant did the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge and was considered the winner.
(BTM) The contestant was selected as one of the bottom entries in the Main Dish challenge but was not eliminated.
(OUT) The contestant lost that week's Main Dish challenge and was out of the competition.
(IN) The contestant get switched by the host to the other team.
Rachael Ray joins Anne Burrell to host season 10.
(RUNNER-UP) The contestant was the runner-up in the finals of the competition.
(WIN) The contestant did the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge or Skill Drill and was considered the winner.
(TIE) The contestant tied with another contestant as the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge or Skill Drill.
(BTM) The contestant was selected as one of the bottom entries in the Main Dish challenge, but was not eliminated.
(OUT) The contestant lost that week's Main Dish challenge and was out of the competition.
(SAVE) The contestant lost that week's Main Dish challenge but was saved by their respective team mentor.
In Episode 6, Both Chef Anne and Chef Rachael decided not to send anyone from their teams home.
Tyler Florence joins Anne Burrell to host seasons 6, replacing Bobby Flay after 3 seasons.
Contestant Stephanie Streisand was deemed too ill to continue on January 11 .
(RUNNER-UP) The contestant was the runner-up in the finals of the competition.
(WIN) The contestant did the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge or Skill Drill and was considered the winner.
(BTM) The contestant was selected as one of the bottom entries in the Main Dish challenge, but was not eliminated.
(OUT) The contestant lost that week's Main Dish challenge and was out of the competition.
(WDR) The contestant withdrew from the competition due to illness.
Casting for season 2 of Worst Cooks in America was held at the LA Marriott Burbank Airport, Hotel & Convention Center on March 27, 2010 [REF].
(RUNNER-UP) The contestant was the runner-up in the finals of the competition.
(WIN) The contestant did the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge and was considered the winner.
(BTM) The contestant was selected as one of the bottom entries in the Main Dish challenge, but was not eliminated.
(OUT) The contestant lost that week's Main Dish challenge and was out of the competition.
* Initially a member of the other team but switched after Chef Robert won the bet on whose team member made the best burgers.
In the first episode, a group of selected novice cooks were to prepare a dish from scratch so the chefs would get an idea of how poorly their skills were.
In the next to last episode of the season, the remaining four recruits learned and replicated a dessert.
After learning and replicating a dessert, the recruits had to prepare a meal for both chefs and a surprise guest, usually a spouse or other family member.
Two recruits remained in the final episode and had to prepare an appetizer, main dish, and dessert for a panel of three food critics.
(RUNNER-UP) The contestant was the runner-up in the finals of the competition.
(WIN) The contestant did the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge and was considered the winner.
(BTM) The contestant was selected as one of the bottom entries in the Main Dish challenge, but was not eliminated.
(OUT) The contestant lost that week's Main Dish challenge and was out of the competition.
(RUNNER-UP) The contestant was the runner-up in the finals of the competition.
(WIN) The contestant did the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge or Skill Drill and was considered the winner.
(TIE) The contestant tied with another contestant as the best on their team in the week's Main Dish challenge or Skill Drill.
(BTM) The contestant was selected as one of the bottom entries in the Main Dish challenge, but was not eliminated.
(OUT) The contestant lost that week's Main Dish challenge and was out of the competition.
The United States cut its orders for sugar from Cuba by 95 percent, following a July 2 authorization by Congress giving President Eisenhower the power to decrease the quota of sugar purchases [REF].
Eighteen men were killed in the crash of a U.S. Navy blimp off of the coast of Barnegat Light, New Jersey [REF].
Bhumibol Adulyadej, King of Thailand, became the first monarch in history to ride on the New York Subway [REF].
U. S. Senator John F. Kennedy won his party's nomination for President on the first ballot at the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, but not until Wyoming's 15 delegates gave him the 2/3 majority.
The Pilkington Committee on Broadcasting was set up in the UK to review the state of broadcasting.
Khieu Samphan, editor of the Phnom Penh newspaper L'Observatueur, was arrested and beaten by ten members of Cambodia's security police.
Nobusuke Kishi, the Prime Minister of Japan, was stabbed six times in his left leg at his home, but the wounds were not life-threatening [REF].
Ghana became a republic, with Prime Minister Kwame Nkrumah as its first President.
A Soviet MiG fighter north of Murmansk in the Barents Sea shot down a 6-man RB-47.
Italian Somaliland gained its independence from Italy, five days after British Somaliland, and merged into the Somali Republic.
In Canada, Status Indians were given the right to vote.
Sirimavo Bandaranaike became the world's first elected female head of government, after her Sri Lanka Freedom Party won a majority in elections in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka).
President Eisenhower announced that the United States had a budget surplus of $1.06 billion at the end of the 1960 fiscal year, a dramatic turnaround from the $12,426,000,000 deficit at the end of the 1959 fiscal year [REF].
The submarine made the first launch of a rocket from underwater into the air, with the firing of an unarmed Polaris missile while submerged at a depth of 30 feet [REF].
Harper Lee's classic novel To Kill a Mockingbird was first published [REF].
A U.S. Navy C-47 cargo transport plane crashed into the side of a mountain near Quito, Ecuador, killing all 18 persons on board [REF].
Uttar Pradesh Agricultural University, located at Pantnagar in the Uttar Pradesh state in India, conducted its first classes.
Fernando Tambroni resigned as Prime Minister of Italy.
Thirty-three iron miners in West Germany were killed in a mine fire near Salzgitter [REF].
Two U.S. Navy destroyers, the and the , collided off of the coast of Newport Beach, California, killing ten sailors [REF].
Trans Australia Airlines Flight 408 was taken over by a gunman, Alex Hildebrandt of Russia, in the first airplane hijacking in Australia.
In new elections in South Korea, the Democrat party, led by Chang Myon (also known as John M. Chang and Tsutomu Tamaoka), won a majority.
The unmanned spacecraft Mercury-Atlas 1 was launched from Cape Canaveral on a sub-orbital flight to test a manned capsule, but failed 58 seconds later [REF].
The U.S. Federal Communications Commission voted 6-1 against censorship of American radio and television communications, following hearings in which various witnesses testified in favor of FCC intervention [REF].
Number 10 Downing Street, the official London residence of the British Prime Minister was closed for renovations expected to last at least two years.
In Paris, the Soviet Union beat Yugoslavia in extra time on Viktor Ponedelnik's goal, to win the first UEFA European Football Championship, 2-1.
The Havana Sugar Kings played their last game under that name, winning in Richmond and defeating the Virginians, 7-1 [REF].
The Eritrean Liberation Front was founded, with the goal of liberating Eritrea from the rule of Ethiopia [REF].
The Republic of Ireland ended its policy of neutrality with the dispatch of soldiers of the 32nd Infantry Battalion to Africa to join United Nations peacekeeping forces during the Congo Crisis [REF].
In Chicago, delegates to the Republican National Convention nominated U.S. Vice President Richard M. Nixon for President, with 1,321 votes.
The Federal Reserve Board voted to cut margin requirements from 90% to 70%, in order to encourage buying and selling in the American stock market [REF].
Tulsa is located in the northeastern corner of Oklahoma, 99mi northeast of Oklahoma City; situated between the edge of the Great Plains and the foot of the Ozarks in a generally forested region of rolling hills.
The city developed on both sides of the prominent Arkansas River, which flows in a wide, sandy-bottomed channel.
Heavily wooded and with abundant parks and water areas, the city has several prominent hills, such as "Shadow Mountain" and "Turkey Mountain", which create varied terrain, especially in its southern portions.
A building boom in the early 20th century gave Tulsa one of the largest concentrations of art deco architecture in the United States [REF].
In addition, the city's early prosperity funded the construction of a number of elegant Craftsman, Georgian, storybook, Tudor, Greek Revival, Italianate, Spanish revival, and colonial revival homes (many of which can be found in Tulsa's uptown and Midtown neighborhoods).
Building booms in later half of the twentieth century gave the city a larger base of contemporary architectural styles, including a number of buildings by famed architect Bruce Goff, who lived in Tulsa.
The BOK Tower, built during this period, is the 2nd tallest building in Oklahoma and the surrounding states of Missouri, New Mexico, Arkansas, and Kansas [REF].
Downtown Tulsa is an area of approximately surrounded by an inner-dispersal loop created by Interstate 244, Highway 64, and Highway 75 [REF].
The city's historical residential core lies in an area known as Midtown, containing upscale neighborhoods built in the early 20th century with architecture ranging from art deco to Greek Revival.
Areas of Tulsa west of the Arkansas River are called West Tulsa, and are marked by large parks, wilderness reserves, and large oil refineries.
A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Tulsa 32nd most walkable of fifty largest U.S. cities [REF].
Tulsa has a temperate climate of the humid subtropical variety (Köppen Cfa) with a yearly average temperature of and an average precipitation of [REF].
Primarily in the spring and early summer months, the city is subjected to severe thunderstorms containing large hail, damaging winds, and, occasionally, tornadoes,[REF] providing the area with a disproportionate share of its annual rainfall [REF].
On average, May is the wettest month, averaging 5.9 inches of rainfall.
As of the 2010 census, there were 391,906 people, 163,975 households, and 95,246 families residing in the city, with a population density of .
In the city proper, the age distribution was 24.8% of the population under the age of 18, 10.9% from 18 to 24, 29.9% from 25 to 44, 21.5% from 45 to 64, and 12.9% who were 65 years of age or older, while the median age was 34 years.
The Tulsa Metropolitan Area, or the region immediately surrounding Tulsa with strong social and economic ties to the city,[REF] occupies a large portion of the state's northeastern quadrant.
Tulsa has a rich and diverse religious history, with notable and culturally significant communities of Christians, Jews, Muslims and others.
Tulsa is part of the Southern region demographers and commentators refer to as the "Bible Belt," where Protestant and, in particular, Southern Baptist and Evangelical Christian traditions are very prominent.
While the state of Oklahoma has fewer Roman Catholics than the national average,[REF] Tulsa has a higher percentage owing in large part to the influx of Eastern and Midwestern settlers during the oil boom.
Tulsa is also home to the largest Jewish community in Oklahoma, with active Reform, Conservative and Orthodox congregations [REF].
Tulsa is also home to the progressive All Souls Unitarian Church, reportedly the largest Unitarian Universalist congregation in the United States [REF].
Traditionally, Tulsa's economy has been led by the energy industry.
Over the city's history many large oil companies have been headquartered in the city, including Warren Petroleum (which merged with Gulf Oil in what was then the largest merger in the energy industry), Skelly Oil, Getty Oil and CITGO.
Today, Tulsa is again home to the headquarters of many international oil and gas-related companies, including Williams Companies, SemGroup, ONE Gas, Syntroleum, ONEOK, Laredo Petroleum, Samson Resources, Helmerich & Payne, Magellan Midstream Partners, WPX Energy, and Excel Energy.
Tulsa has diversified to capitalize on its status as a regional hub with substantial innovation assets.
During a national recession from 2001 to 2003, the city lost 28,000 jobs [REF].
Though the oil industry has historically dominated Tulsa's economy, efforts in economic diversification have created a base in the sectors of aerospace, finance, technology, telecommunications, high tech, and manufacturing [REF].
Tulsa's aerospace industry is substantial and growing.
Tulsa is also part of the Oklahoma-South Kansas Unmanned Aerial Systems (drone) industry cluster, a region which awarded funding by the U.S. Small Business Administration to build on its progress as a hub this emerging industry [REF].
As the second largest metropolitan area in Oklahoma and a hub for the growing Northeastern Oklahoma-Northwest Arkansas-Southwestern Missouri corridor, city is also home to a number of the region's most sophisticated law, accounting and medical practices.
A mayor-council government has been in place in Tulsa since 1989 when the city converted from a city commission government deemed wasteful and less efficient [REF].
A city councilor from each of the city's nine council districts is elected every two years, each serving a term of two years.
In 2012, Tulsa's crime rate were 46 murders, 1,106 robberies, and 6,045 burglaries, which was a 2% crime rate.
The Presbyterian Church (PCUSA) established the Presbyterian Mission Day School, a one-story building at what would become 4th Street and Boston Avenue in 1884.
Tulsa built its first two public schools in 1905.
Tulsa High School opened in 1906 on the same block formerly occupied by the Presbyterian mission school, which had been razed.
There are three primary public school districts in the city of Tulsa.
A variety of independent and sectarian schools exist in Tulsa, also.
The largest library system in the Tulsa Metropolitan Area, the Tulsa City-County Library, contains over 1.7 million volumes in 25 library facilities [REF].
The first institute of higher education was established in Tulsa when Kendall College, a Presbyterian school, moved from Muskogee to Tulsa in 1907.
Oklahoma State University houses three campuses in the city, the OSU Center for Health Sciences, the OSU College of Osteopathic Medicine, and OSU - Tulsa, accommodating upper-level undergraduate and graduate courses.
The University of Oklahoma operates what is known as the OU-Tulsa Schusterman Center, offering bachelors, master's and doctoral degree programs in conjunction with the main campus in Norman and the OU Health Sciences Center in Oklahoma City.
Rogers State University is the Tulsa area's original public, undergraduate-focused, four-year university, though Tulsa Community College has a partnership allowing students to complete four-year bachelor's degrees through OU-Tulsa, OSU-Tulsa, LU-Tulsa and NSU-Broken Arrow [REF].
The Spartan School of Aeronautics enrolls 1,500 students at its flight programs near Tulsa International Airport[REF] and the city's vocational education is headed by Tulsa Technology Center, the oldest and largest vocational technology institution in the state [REF].
Trade schools located in Tulsa include Vatterott College,[REF] Oklahoma Technical college,[REF] and Tulsa Tech [REF].
Transportation in Tulsa is aided by Tulsa Transit's bus network of 97 vehicles[REF] and two primary airports, while the Tulsa Port of Catoosa provides transportation of goods and industry through international trade routes.
Tulsa has an extensive highway system that connects drivers to many cities in the region such as Joplin, Missouri on the Will Rogers Turnpike and Oklahoma City on the Turner Turnpike.
Tulsa Transit, the city's bus operator, runs 97 buses on 19 different routes across Tulsa and in surrounding suburbs such as Broken Arrow, Sand Springs, and Jenks.
The Tulsa International Airport, (which is home to six commercial airlines, four cargo carriers, and one charter airline) serves more than three million travelers annually with almost 63 departures every day,[REF] contributing nearly $5.3 billion to the economy [REF].
There are no mass transit rail lines in Tulsa, though the prospect of passenger rail lines from downtown Tulsa to the suburb of Broken Arrow is being studied [REF].
Starting in February 2014, a limited number of test trips of the Eastern Flyer began to run, connecting the Tulsa and Oklahoma City metros via train on Sundays [REF].
At the head of the McClellan-Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System, the Tulsa Port of Catoosa is the most inland ocean-going port in the United States[REF][REF] and connects barge traffic from Tulsa to the Mississippi River via the Verdigris and Arkansas rivers.
The Saint Francis Health System owns several hospitals with a central location at Saint Francis Hospital in the southern part of the city.
The area where Tulsa now exists was considered Indian Territory when it was first formally settled by the Lochapoka and Creek tribes in 1836 [REF].
Although Oklahoma was not yet a state during the Civil War, the Tulsa area did see its share of fighting.
On January 18, 1898, Tulsa was officially incorporated and elected its first mayor, Edward Calkins [REF].
Tulsa was a small town near the banks of the Arkansas River in 1901 when its first oil well, named Sue Bland No. 1,[REF] was established.
Known as the "Oil Capital of the World" for most of the 20th century, the city's success in the energy industry prompted construction booms in the popular Art Deco style of the time [REF].
In the early 20th century, Tulsa was home to the "Black Wall Street", one of the most prosperous black communities in the United States at the time [REF].
In 1925, Tulsa businessman Cyrus Avery, known as the "Father of Route 66,"[REF] began his campaign to create a road linking Chicago to Los Angeles by establishing the U.S. Highway 66 Association in Tulsa, earning the city the nickname the "Birthplace of Route 66" [REF].
For the remainder of the mid-20th century, the city had a master plan to construct parks, churches, museums, rose gardens, improved infrastructure, and increased national advertising [REF].
A national recession greatly affected the city's economy in 1982, as areas of Texas and Oklahoma heavily dependent on oil suffered the freefall in gas prices due to a glut, and a mass exodus of oil industries [REF].
In 2003, the "Vision 2025" program was approved by voters, to enhance and revitalize Tulsa's infrastructure and tourism industry.
Tulsa restaurants and food trucks offer a number of cuisines, but several cuisines are particularly prominent in Tulsa's culinary landscape owing to its distinctive history.
Tulsa is known nationally for its barbecue offerings; its barbecue reflects its midpoint location "between pig country and cow country," that is, on the border of the South and the West [REF].
Oklahoma barbecue is also unique in its emphasis on hickory-smoked baloney, nicknamed "Oklahoma tenderloin" and its fried okra [REF].
Lebanese steakhouses were once numerous in the region stretching from Bristow, Oklahoma to Tulsa, but now mostly exist in the Tulsa region [REF].
Oklahomans have been consuming chili since well before statehood, owing to the influence of Mexican-American culture on the state [REF].
Greek immigrants to Tulsa who came by way of Brooklyn, Pennsylvania and Michigan brought with them the tradition of Coney Island-style hot dogs with chili on a bun [REF].
By and large, Tulsa's traditional cuisine reflects the influence of Southern foodways, particularly "upland South and..
The wild onion dinner is a festive gathering that originated with the Southeastern tribes which call Eastern Oklahoma.
Though Oklahoma is placed entirely in the Southern United States by the United States Census Bureau,[REF] Tulsa is influenced by the nearby Southwest, Midwest, and Southern cultural regions, as well as a historical Native American presence.
Tulsa is home to several internationally renowned museums.
In the Osage Hills of Northwest Tulsa, the Gilcrease Museum holds the world's largest, most comprehensive collection of art and artifacts of the American West, [REF].
In addition, the city hosts a number of galleries, experimental art-spaces, smaller museums and display spaces located throughout the city (clustered mostly in downtown, Brookside and the Pearl District).
Cultural and Historical Archives .
Opened in April 2013, the Woody Guthrie Center in the Brady Arts District is Tulsa's newest museum and archive.
With remnants of the Holocaust and artifacts relevant to Judaism in Oklahoma, the Sherwin Miller Museum of Jewish Art preserves the largest collection of Judaica in the Southwestern and South-Central United States [REF].
Since 1969, public displays of artwork in Tulsa have been funded by one percent of its annual city budget [REF].
Tulsa's music scene is also famous for the eponymous "Tulsa Sound" which blends rockabilly, country, rock 'n' roll, and blues and has inspired local artists like J.J. Cale and Leon Russell as well as international superstars like Eric Clapton.
A number of concert venues, dance halls and bars gave rise to the Tulsa Sound but Cain's Ballroom might be the best known.
The city's film community hosts annual festivals such as the Tulsa United Film Festival and Tulsa Overground Film and Music Festival.
The famous literary prize the Helmerich Award is also awarded in Tulsa by members of the Tulsa Library Trust.
The city's zoo, the Tulsa Zoo, was voted "America's Favorite Zoo" in 2005 by Microsoft Game Studios in connection with a national promotion of its Zoo Tycoon 2 computer game [REF].
Tulsa supports a wide array of sports at the professional and collegiate levels.
At the secondary level, the Tulsa area is home to several high school athletic programs that are frequently ranked among the best nationally, particularly in football (e.g.
In 2008 Tulsa funded 39.2 million to build a new ballpark in the Greenwood District near downtown for its Class AA Texas League baseball team, the Tulsa Drillers.
The city's running and cycling communities support events such as the Tulsa Tough cycling race, the Route 66 Marathon,[REF] and the Tulsa Run, which features over 8000 participants annually [REF].
In motor sports, Tulsa annually hosts the Chili Bowl indoor race at the Tulsa Expo Center.
RB Leipzig played its inaugural season in 2009-10 at the Stadion am Bad in Markranstädt.
Red Bull Arena had a capacity of 44,345 seats during the 2014-15 season.
The Red Bull Arena is an all-seated stadium, without standing areas.
The first round of the 2011-12 DFB-Pokal against VfL Wolfsburg on 29 July 2011 at the Red Bull Arena was attended by 31,212 spectators.
The last home game of the 2013-14 3. Liga season against 1.
RB Leipzig holds two attendance records.
RB Leipzig played its hundredth match at the Red Bull Arena on 4 October 2015, against 1.
Their first Bundesliga home match was played versus Borussia Dortmund in front of 42,558 spectators, on 10 September 2016.
In October 2014, German media reported that the club wanted to expand the Red Bull Arena to 55,000 seats for future first division Bundesliga play.
The club had previously reserved an area near the A14 motorway north of Leipzig, close to the Leipzig/Halle Airport, which could be used to build a completely new stadium.
Current owner of Red Bull Arena, Michael Kölmel, commented on plans to build a new stadium in an interview in August 2015.
In October 2015, expansion of the Red Bull Arena was back on the agenda.
In February 2016, German newspaper Leipziger Volkszeitung reported that club management again considered the possibility of building a new stadium with a capacity of 80,000 seats north of Leipzig.
As of 2015, RB Leipzig has 17 men and women's junior teams with 250 players, including the Reserve team.
Training and matches are conducted at several grounds in Leipzig.
The club arranges the RB Leipzig Football School at different locations several times per year.
RB Leipzig has a partnership in junior football with SC Pfullendorf [REF].
The 17 RB Leipzig junior teams collected 9 league titles and 3 cup titles together during the 2014-15 season [REF].
The first four men's junior teams, from A- to D-juniors, were acquired from FC Sachsen Leipzig in the summer of 2009 [REF].
The B-junior team qualified for the Under 17 Bundesliga in 2011 [REF].
The A-junior team qualified for the Under 19 Bundesliga in 2014.
The 2014-15 season proved successful.
As of 2015, the club has 14 men's junior teams, ranging from U8 to the Reserve team [REF].
In June 2013, RB Leipzig announced the creation of its first two women's football teams, starting from the 2013-14 season.
In June 2016, RB Lepzig accepted to take over the state training center for women's and girls football of the Saxony Football Association (SFV) at Gontardweg from women's football club FFV Leipzig from 1 July 2016.
As of 2015, the club has three women's junior teams, ranging from B- to D-juniors [REF].
The RB Leipzig youth academy is the multi-layered youth system of RB Leizpig.
Planning for a training center with facilities for a youth academy began in 2010, and the first section of the training center was opened in August 2011.
The youth academy became a certified DFB-Youth academy in October 2012 [REF].
An expansion of the training center at Cottaweg began in January 2014.
The youth academy was certified with the highest rating, three stars and the title "Excellent", by the DFB and the DFL in July 2015.
The new sports complex at the RB Training center was opened in September 2015.
The style of play taught at the youth academy is aggressive, ball oriented, and run intensive, with forward defending and fast transitions [REF].
The scouting system operates worldwide, in cooperation with other football clubs in the Red Bull sporting portfolio.
For scouting purposes, the club arranges an annual "Talent Scouting Day", where boys and girls aged between six and 16 years are scouted.
The RB Leipzig youth academy has been accused of poaching young players from other clubs in questionable ways.
The RB Leipzig youth academy cooperates with the youth academies of FC Red Bull Salzburg, New York Red Bulls and Red Bull Brasil.
RasenballSport Leipzig e.V is a registered voluntary association.
Significant organizational changes were made in 2014, following requirements set up by the German Football League (DFL).
In addition, a supervisory board was added [REF].
The association is responsible for men's junior teams from U8 to U14 and all women's football teams [REF].
Voting membership is severely restricted [REF].
For the establishment of a registered voluntary association, an association is required by German law[REF] to have at least seven members.
This restrictive membership policy met criticism, thus one of the original requirements set up by the DFL in order to obtain a license for the 2014-15 2. Bundesliga season was to lower the membership fees and open up the association for new members.
On 2 December 2014, the general meeting of the association voted unanimously for the founding of a spin-off organization in the form of a GmbH.
As of 2015, Red Bull GmbH is the main shareholder of RasenballSport Leipzig GmbH, holding 99 percent of the shares.
As of April 2016, the general manager of RasenballSport Leipzig GmbH is Oliver Mintzlaff [REF].
RB Leipzig's kits have been provided by German sportswear brand Adidas since the club's founding.
The first reserve team was formed out of the second team of SSV Markranstädt and played its inaugural season in the 2009-10 Bezirksliga Leipzig.
In order to replace the reserve team and to avoid having to begin with its reserve team from the bottom of the German football league system, RB Leipzig entered a partnership with ESV Delitzsch from the city of Delitzsch in the northwest of Saxony.
By the looming bankruptcy of FC Sachsen Leipzig, which eventually ended with the club folding in June 2011, RB Leipzig considered purchasing its playing right for the Oberliga for its reserve team.
Tino Vogel was appointed new head coach for the 2011-12 season.
The 2014-15 season included opponents such as SSV Markranstädt and 1. FC Lokomotive Leipzig,[REF] but the reserve team successfully adapted to the Oberliga and came to dominate its league.
Before the 2015-16 season, almost half of the players from the previous season left the team, including top goal scorer Tom Nattermann, who left for FC Erzgebirge Aue [REF].
Incumbent B-junior coach Robert Klauß was appointed new head coach for the 2016-17 season, replacing Tino Vogel, who had led the reserve team from the Bezirksliga Leipzig to the Regionalliga Nordost [REF].
The reserve team plays it home matches at the Stadion am Bad in Markranstädt.
The reserve promoted from the seventh to the fourth tier in its eight years of existence.
Having earlier been committed in women's junior football, RB Leipzig entered women's football in 2016.
The first squad was set up by 17 players from FFV Leipzig, five talents from the RB Leipzig women's junior teams and one player from the reserve team of FF USV Jena.
The RB Leipzig women's team played its first competitive match on 7 August 2016 in the first round of the 2016-17 Landespokal Sachsen away against SV Johannstadt 90.
The entry the RB Leipzig women's team in the 2016-17 Landesliga Sachsen, came with criticism from several clubs in the league.
The RB Leipzig women's team was set to play its first league match on 21 August 2016 away against Bischofswerdaer FV 08.
RB Leipzig has responded to the criticism, through Thomas Albeck, the new head of the state training center for women's and girls football.
RB Leipzig was drawn against TuS Pegau in the second round of the 2016-17 Landespokal Sachsen.
In order to settle the conflict in the league around the entry of RB Leipzig, the SFV invited the different clubs to a round table.
RB Leipzig played its first counted league match home against FC Silesia Görlitz on 11 September 2016.
The RB Leipzig women's football team plays its home matches at the Sportanlage Gontardweg, which is also the location of the state training center for women's and girls football of the SFV, taken over by RB Leipzig from FFV Leipzig in July 2016 [REF].
The establishment of RB Leipzig has caused much controversy in Germany.
The introduction of RB Leipzig was met with protests from supporters of other Leipzig football clubs, notably 1. FC Lokomotive Leipzig and FC Sachsen Leipzig.
The German economist Dr. Tobias Kollman said in 2009 that he saw Red Bull GmbH as a company with clear economic goals for its projects.
RB Leipzig and Red Bull GmbH have met protests from supporter groups across Germany [REF].
Following that RB Leipzig gained promotion to the 2. Bundesliga in 2014, supporter groups from ten clubs in the 2. Bundesliga created a campaign against the club, called "Nein zu RB" ("No to RB") [REF].
At away matches, the club has regularly been greeted with protests in various forms.
During the home match against FC Hansa Rostock on 23 November 2013, the away supporters protested by being entirely absent for the first seven minutes of the match and then filled the guest block in large numbers [REF].
At some occasions, the protests have turned into violence and threats [REF].
Several football clubs, such as VfB Stuttgart, 1. FC Nurnberg, TSV 1860 Munich, 1. FC Union Berlin, FC Erzgebirge Aue, Kickers Offenbach, Chemnitzer FC and KSV Hessen Kassel, have cancelled friendly matches against RB Leipzig, due to protests from their own supporters [REF].
Some critics can however also be found among the supporters of RB Leipzig.
Representatives of Red Bull GmbH and RB Leipzig and other people have commented on the issues and responded to the criticism.
It has been suggested that the restrictive membership policy was implemented in order to prevent the club from being taken over by hostile supporters [REF].
Both Dietrich Mateschitz and sporting director Ralf Rangnick have made comments on transfer policy.
Several people have responded to the rejection of RB Leipzig as a "plastic club", which lacks traditions.
Sporting director Ralf Ragnick declared in 2012 that there were actually advantages to working in a new club without deep-rooted traditions.
RB Leipzig has also received positive criticism and praise.
The chairman of the Saxony Football Association (SFV) Klaus Reichenbach expressed optimism about the club's founding.
In interviews published in German newspaper Bild in 2011, representatives of several Leipzig football clubs explained how their clubs had benefited from the establishment of RB Leipzig.
According to a survey carried out by the Leipziger Volkszeitung in 2009, more than 70% of the residents of Leipzig welcomed Red Bull GmhH's investment in local football [REF].
Before investing in Leipzig, Red Bull GmbH, led by co-owner Dietrich Mateschitz, searched three and a half years for a suitable location for an investment in German football [REF].
The company made its first attempt to enter the German football scene in 2006.
Red Bull GmbH then turned to West Germany.
In 2007, Red Bull GmbH made plans to invest in Fortuna Düsseldorf, a traditional club with more than 100 years of history [REF].
Leipzig was considered a most favorable place for an investment.
In Leipzig, exemplary infrastructure could also be found.
An investment in a club playing in one of the top divisions in Germany would have been a costly affair.
A new established club would need teams and a playing right.
RasenBallsport Leipzig e.V. was founded on 19 May 2009.
RB Leipzig became the fifth football commitment in the Red Bull sporting portfolio, following FC Red Bull Salzburg in Austria, the New York Red Bulls in the United States, Red Bull Brasil in Brazil and Red Bull Ghana in Ghana [REF].
RB Leipzig began with a partnership with fifth division side SSV Markranstädt.
The transfer of the playing right for the Oberliga had to be approved by the North East German Football Association (NOFV).
RB Leipzig would play its inaugural season in the Oberliga at the Stadion am Bad in Markranstädt.
On its founding, RB Leipzig aimed to play first division Bundesliga football within eight years [REF].
After some previously scheduled games had to be canceled due to safety concerns, RB Leipzig played its first match on 10 July 2009, a friendly match against the Landesliga club SV Bannewitz.
During the further course of the season, RB Leipzig suffered its first defeat on 13 September 2009, in a match against Budissa Bautzen.
RB Leipzig targeted a place in the 2010-11 DFB-Pokal, which would have been won by winning the 2009-10 Saxony Cup.
The incumbent chairman, Andreas Saldo, left the club in January 2010[REF] and the position was assumed by the former Hamburger SV sporting director and incumbent sporting director for the common Red Bull football commitment Dietmar Beiersdorfer [REF].
The players Christian Mittenzwei, Sebastian Hauck, Stefan Schumann, Toni Jurascheck and Michael Lerchl did not receive new contracts for the following Regionalliga season, while players Frank Räbsch, Ronny Kujat and two other players ended their careers [REF].
Before entry to the Regionalliga, there were two significant changes in the club.
The 2010-11 Regionalliga season started with a series of draws, the first one on 6 August 2010 against Türkiyemspor Berlin in front of 4,028 spectators at the Red Bull Arena.
After a moderate start to the season, the club found itself chasing Chemnitzer FC, which was considered a possible candidate for promotion.
The club finished its first season in the Regionalliga in 4th place, thus missing out on promotion.
Because the club missed out on promotion during the second half of the 2010-11 season, Peter Pacult from Rapid Wien was announced as the new head coach for the 2011-12 season on 4 May 2011.
Also, several players left the team, among them Lars Müller, Sven Neuhaus, Thomas Kläsener and Nico Frommer, all participants in the previous Saxony Cup final [REF].
On 29 July 2011, RB Leipzig made its debut in the DFB-Pokal, in front of 31,212 spectators at the Red Bull Arena.
The 2011-12 Regionalliga season saw the largest win in club history, when RB Leipzig defeated SV Wilhelmshaven 8-2 on 19 February 2012 [REF].
The 2012-13 season in the reformed Regionalliga Nordost began with major personnel changes.
The 2012-13 Saxony Cup was another success.
As the winner of the 2012-13 Regionallig Nordost, RB Leipzig won a place in the qualification for the 3. Liga.
The second leg was played on 2 June 2013 and ended 2-2 after two goals to RB Leipzig during extra time.
In the 2013-14 season, RB Leipzig made its first appearance in the 3. Liga in club history.
RB Leipzig was eliminated by FC Augsburg in the first round of the 2013-14 DFB-Pokal on 2 August 2013 after losing 0-2 at the Red Bull Arena.
On 5 October 2013, RB Leipzig again met the first placed team.
During the winter break, players Christos Papadimitriou, Juri Judt, Carsten Kammlott and Bastian Schulz left the team.
After losing 1-2 away to MSV Duisburg on 1 February 2014, the team would not concede a single defeat for the rest of the season.
By finishing the season in second place, RB Leipzig won promotion to the 2. Bundesliga and became the first team since the introduction of the 3. Liga to win promotion to the 2. Bundesliga after only one season [REF].
Following promotion to the 2. Bundesliga, the organization responsible for licensing was no longer the DFB, but instead the German Football League (DFL).
RB Leipzig filed an appeal on 30 April 2014 [REF].
The appeal was rejected in a second decision by the DFL on 8 May 2014 [REF].
RB Leipzig filed a second appeal on 12 May 2014 [REF].
The club spent an estimated sum of approximately 12 million Euros on new players during the summer of 2014.
RB Leipzig played a series of friendly matches during the 2014-15 pre-season.
The 2014-15 2. Bundesliga season began with 0-0 draw against VfR Aalen on 2 August 2014, followed up by a couple of wins and another draw.
RB Leipzig was drawn against SC Paderborn in the first round of the 2014-15 DFB-Pokal.
RB Leipzig released its own club magazine Klub on 6 October 2014 [REF].
After a series of disappointing results, the club had dropped down to a 7th place by the 13th matchday.
RB Leipzig strengthened the team during the winter break by signing Omer Damari from Austria Wien, Emil Forsberg from Malmö FF and players Rodnei and Yordy Reyna from FC Red Bull Salzburg.
On 6 February 2015, the club lost 2-0 to Erzgebirge Aue.
On 5 March 2015, RB Leipzig met VfL Wolfsburg in the third round of the 2014-15 DFB-Pokal.
The preferred candidate of sporting director Ralf Ragnick as new head coach from the summer was former Mainz 05 coach Thomas Tuchel, but the negotiations with Thomas Tuchel failed.
RB Leipzig finished the 2014-15 2. Bundesliga season in fifth place.
Before the 2015-16 season, RB Leipzig invested further in strengthening the team, signing Davie Selke from Werder Bremen, Atınç Nukan from Beşiktaş, Marcel Halstenberg from FC St. Pauli and Willi Orban from 1. FC Kaiserslautern.
RB Leipzig also made transfers with its unofficial sister club, the FC Red Bull Salzburg.
The signing of Davie Selke was record breaking, being the most expensive player ever signed in the history of the 2. Bundesliga [REF].
During the pre-season 2014-15, RB Leipzig defeated Southampton with 5-4 in Bischofshofen on 8 July 2015,[REF] and Rubin Kazan with 1-0 in Leogang on 12 July 2015 [REF].
The club was drawn against VfL Osnabrück in the first round of the 2015-16 DFB-Pokal.
In the midst of the European migrant crisis in 2015, both club, staff, players and fans of RB Leipzig showed support for refugees.
Being counted as winner in the first round of the DFB-Pokal, RB Leipzig was qualified to the next round.
After defeating SV Sandhausen 2-1 away at the 13th matchday on 1 November 2015, RB Leipzig stood at first place in the league [REF].
RB Leipzig made only few transfers during the winter break.
RB Leipzig held the leading position in the league until the 27th matchday, when it was again lost to SC Freiburg, after the team suffered a 3-1 defeat away against 1.
At the end of the season, Ralf Rangnick was to resign as head coach, in order to be able to focus on his job as sporting director.
RB Leipzig remained undefeated in the first thirteen league matches of the 2016-17 season, breaking a record for the longest undefeated streak of a promoted team to the Bundesliga [REF].
RB Leipzig became first Bundesliga debutant, since the German reunification, to qualify for a European tournament, following a 4-0 win against SC Freiburg on 15 April 2017 [REF].
RB Leipzig has 27 official fanclubs as of November 2016.
The different fan clubs and supporter groups are organized in the supporter union Fanverband RB Leipzig Fans.
Several German newspapers have noted the emergence of distinctly nonconformist supporter groups at the Red Bull Arena.
The ultra group Red Aces took position against Legida, the local offshoot of Pegida, at the beginning of 2015.
RB Leipzig supporters travelled in numbers to the first away match of 2016, against FC St. Pauli on 12 February 2016.
The organization Fanprojekt Leipzig was founded in 2011 by initiative of the city of Leipzig and is run by Outlaw gGmbH, full name Outlaw gemeinnützige Gesellschaft für Kinder- und Jugendhilfe mbH.
Fanprojekt Leipzig is an organization for young football fans of different clubs in Leipzig, and works as an independent institution towards the different clubs.
Fanprojekt Leipzig runs a number of centers in Leipzig used for purposes such as recreational activities, content projects, painting and creation of minor choreographies, and as meeting places.
RB Leipzig entered a cooperation agreement with Fanprojekt Leipzig in 2013.
In 2010, Red Bull announced its intention to engage long term in Leipzig.
The construction was to be carried out in two phases and began in March 2011 [REF].
The second phase of construction began in January 2014 [REF].
The new sports complex was opened in September 2015 and taken in use by the professional team and six junior teams, from U14 to the reserve team [REF].
Remains to be constructed in the spring of 2016 are a covered grandstand with 1,000 seats, an area for motor skills-training and a parking area [REF].
As of 2015, the club has already plans for even further expansions of the training center.
Historically, the region was known as Kizuwatna by the Hittites and it was divided into two parts, Uru Adaniya (flat Cilicia) and western Cilicia (Tarza), which was also known as the mountainous Cilicia.
The climate of Çukurova shows significant differences at the mountains and the lower plains.
The Mountains of Çukurova are formed from ancient limestones, conglomerate, marlstone and similar materials.
Akyatan, Akyayan, Salt Lake, Seven lakes at Aladağ, and Karstik Dipsiz lake near Karaisalı are the lakes of the region.
The major rivers in Çukurova are Seyhan, Ceyhan, Berdan (Tarsus), Asi and Göksu.
Seyhan River emerges from the confluence of Zamantı and Göksu rivers which originate from Kayseri Province and flows into the Gulf of Mersin.
Ceyhan River emerges from the confluence of Aksu and Hurman rivers and flows into Cape Hürmüz at the Gulf of İskenderun.
Berdan River originates from the Taurus Mountains and flows into the Mediterranean, south of Tarsus.
Göksu river originates from the Taurus Mountains and flows into the Mediterranean, 16 km southeast of Silifke.
Asi River (Orontes) rises in the great springs of Labweh on the side of the Beqaa Valley and it runs due north, parallel with the coast and flows into the Mediterranean just south of the little port of Samandağı.
Çukurova is well known for the vast fertile land and highly productive agriculture.
The Çukurova plain has some of the most fertile soil in the world in which 3 harvests can be taken each year.
Çukurova is the second largest honey producer in Turkey after the Muğla-Aydın region [REF].
Chrome is found around Aladağlar.
Baryte resources are around Mersin and Adana.
Iron is found around Feke and Saimbeyli.
Asbestos mines are mostly in Hatay Province.
Limestone reserves are very rich in Çukurova.
Pumice resources are the richest in Turkey.
Çukurova is one of the first industrialized regions of Turkey.
The petrochemical industry is rapidly developing in the region with the investments around the Ceyhan Oil Terminal.
Adana is the commercial center of the region where many of the public and private institutions have their regional offices.
Mersin is the logistics center of the region, hosting numerous logistics companies.
Mersin Seaport is the third largest seaport in Turkey, after İstanbul and İzmir.
İskenderun Seaport is used mostly for transfers to Middle East and Southeastern Turkey [REF].
Ceyhan Oil Terminal is a marine transport terminal for the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline (the "BTC"), the Kirkuk-Ceyhan Oil Pipeline, the planned Samsun-Ceyhan and the Ceyhan-Red Sea pipelines.
Dörtyol Oil Terminal is a marine transport terminal for Batman-Dörtyol oil pipeline which started operating in 1967 to market Batman oil.
While the region has a long coastline, international tourism is not at the level of the neighboring Antalya Province.
Plateaus on the Taurus mountains are cooler escapes for the locals who wants to chill out from hot and humid summers of the lower plains.
Lying at a crossroads of three major religions, namely Judaism, Christianity and Islam, the region is home to numerous landmarks that are important for people of faith.
The region is a popular destination for thermal springs.
Kizkalesi (Maiden Castle), a fort on a small island across Kızkalesi township, was built during the early 12th century by Armenian kings of the Rubeniyan dynasty, to defend the city of Korykos (today Kızkalesi).
Heaven & Hell, situated on a large hill north of Narlıkuyu, consists of the grabens result from assoil of furrings for thousands of years.
The ancient Roman town of Soloi-Pompeiopolis, near the city of Mersin.
Yılanlı Kale (Castle of Serpents), an 11th-century crusader castle built on a historical road connecting Taurus mountains to the city of Antakya.
Anazarbus Castle was built in the 3rd century and served as the center of the ancient metropolis of Anavarza.
Şar (Comona), ancient city located in northernmost Çukurova, some 200 km.
Church of St. Peter in Antakya, was converted into a church while it was a cave on the slopes of Habibi Neccar mountain.
St. Simeon Monastery, a 6th-century giant structure built on a desolate hill 18 km south of Antakya.
Akyatan Lagoon is a large wildlife refuge which acts as a stopover for migratory birds voyaging from Africa to Europe.
Yumurtalık Nature Reserve covers an area of 16,430 hectares within the Seyhan-Ceyhan delta, with its lakes, lagoons and wide collection of plant and animal species.
Aladağlar National Park, located north of Adana, is a huge park of around 55,000 hectares, the summit of Demirkazik at 3756m is the highest point in the middle Taurus mountain range.
Karatepe-Aslantaş National Park located on the west bank of Ceyhan River in Osmaniye Province.
Tekköz-Kengerlidüz Nature Reserve, located 30 km north of Dörtyol, is known for having an ecosystem different from the Mediterranean.
Habibi Neccar Dağı Nature Reserve is famous for its cultural as well as natural value, especially for St Pierre Church, which was carved into the rocks.
There are numerous private primary and high schools besides the state schools in the region.
The region is home to 5 state and 2 foundation universities.
Çukurova University is a state university founded in 1973 with the union of the faculties of Agriculture and Medicine.
Mersin University is a state university founded in 1992, and currently serving with 11 faculties, 6 colleges and 9 vocational schools.
Mustafa Kemal University is a state university located in Hatay Province.
Korkut Ata University was founded in 2007 as a state university with the union of colleges and vocational schools in Osmaniye Province and began enrollment in 2009.
Adana Science and Technology University is a recently founded state university that is planned to have ten faculties, two institutions and a college.
Çağ University is a not-for-profit tuition based university founded in 1997.
Toros University is a not-for-profit tuition based university located in Mersin.
Çukurova has a well-developed transportation system with two airports, two major seaports, motorways and railway lines on the historical route connecting Europe to Middle East.
Çukurova is served by two airports.
Hatay Airport, opened in 2007, is a domestic airport, and currently has flights to İstanbul, Ankara and Nicosia, TRNC.
Another underconstruction airport is Çukurova Regional Airport, According to the newspaper Hürriyet, the project's cost will be 357 million Euro.
There are daily seabus and vehicle-passenger ferry services from Taşucu to Kyrenia, Northern Cyprus.
The O50 - O59 motorways crosses Çukurova.
Parallel to the highway network in Çukurova, there is an extensive railway network.
Çukurova is heavily populated due to its abundant resources, climate and plain geography.
Hatay is the most rural province of Çukurova and also Hatay is the only province that the rural population is rising and the urban population is declining.
Settlements are well spread to all parts of Çukurova.
The region's recorded history dates back over 6,000 years.
The region became an early battleground between Muslim and Christian forces, and was conquered in the 8th century and remained part of the Abbasid Caliphate until reconquered by Byzantine forces in 962.
When Seljuq Turks captured the region in the 12th century, many Turkmens, including Oğuz clans of Yureğir, Afshar and Chepni settled in the regio's northern parts under the direction of Ramadanids.
Between the 1832 Convention of Kütahya leaving the territorial gains acquired by Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt to his administration till the 1841 London Conference convened to settle the question, Çukurova remained under the rule of the Khedive of Egypt.
In 1869, the Vilayet of Adana (Adana Province) was incorporated after splitting up Aleppo Province [REF].
The development of Mersin as a major port also began during this period.
Since all four provinces are economically and geographically inter-dependent, with the current governing structure, regional planning is limited within provinces and does not cover all of Çukurova.
Locally elected municipal governments take care of urban planning and infrastructure.
In Hatay and Osmaniye Provinces in addition to district municipalities there are town (belde) municipalities in communities with a population over 2,000.
Football is the most popular sport in Çukurova, professionally represented at all levels of the Football in Turkey.
Football Clubs of Çukurova .
Basketball Clubs of Çukurova .
The Munster branch of the FitzGeralds, known as the Geraldines, were holders of the title Earl of Desmond, which at the time of the rebellions was held by Gerald FitzGerald, 15th Earl of Desmond, referred to here as the Earl of Desmond.
The first Desmond rebellion (1569-73) had been an armed protest against English intrusion into the Desmond territories.
The First Desmond Rebellion was launched in 1569, in the absence of the Desmond leadership, by James FitzMaurice FitzGerald, the 'captain general' of the FitzGerald army.
The English response after the first rebellion was conciliation of the Geraldines.
Fitzmaurice, who had led the first rebellion, found himself without property and powerless after peace was restored.
Fitzmaurice was therefore impoverished, and in 1574 he was evicted by the Earl from lands he had been renting since 1573.
The factors which drove Fitzmaurice into rebellion also created a wide pool of potential rebels in southern Ireland.
Finally, cultural and religious conflict also played a role in fomenting discontent.
Fitzmaurice's small force might well have been crushed rapidly had he not been joined on 1 August by John of Desmond.
John of Desmond and Fitzmaurice together commanded a force of over 3000 men, including a small number of European soldiers, and several thousand native Irish troops.
The Earl of Desmond, who was reasonably satisfied with the English settlement of the first rebellion, initially tried to stay out of Fitzmaurice's rebellion and attempted to raise the Geraldines to put it down.
A number of the invasion force went to other parts of Ireland.
Fitzmaurice himself mounted a sortie to Connacht to try to provoke rebellion there.
The rebels were left in control of southern Munster and the English did not have enough troops to re-take it.
Nicholas Sanders, Fitzmaurice and others returned to Rome and formed a new expedition with Papal authority.
En route in the English channel, they captured two English vessels and arrived at Dingle harbour (part of the area now known as County Kerry) on 16 July.
The rebels were joined on 25 July by two galleys with 100 more Spanish troops.
On 10 September 1580, 600 Papal troops (Italians and Spaniards) commanded by Sebastiano di San Giuseppe (aka Sebastiano da Modena), landed in Smerwick, near the same point where Fitzmaurice had landed the previous year.
In October 1580, Grey de Wilton with up to 4000 troops arrived at Smerwick and laid siege to the garrison.
After a three-day siege, commander Di san Giuseppe surrendered on 10 October 1580.
Among the English soldiers present at the siege and massacre was the writer and explorer Walter Raleigh.
Munster continued to suffer from bubonic plague and famine in the years following the rebellion, and was described as having vast empty areas and a substantially reduced population.
The main political consequence of the rebellion was the annihilation of the Desmond dynasty's power in southern Ireland.
In Leinster, Fiach MacHugh O'Byrne submitted but was later killed leading a new rebellion in Nine Years War.
Many more former rebels were pardoned but had some land confiscated and had to pay substantial fines.
With the massacre at Smerwick, the tide had turned decisively against the rebels.
Grey was the most ruthless of the English commanders, being described once as "a bloody man, who regarded not the life of subjects more than dogs".
Meanwhile, the rebellion slowly fell apart.
For the Earl of Desmond, there would be no pardon, and he was pursued by crown forces until the end.
While some commentators criticised Moriarty for the slaying of the Earl, to many it brought an end to the ruinous Desmond rebellion and the famine that followed it.
In exile in Europe from 1575, Fitzmaurice tried to get backing for a new rebellion.
With the English adventurer Captain Thomas Stukley, Fitzmaurice planned an expedition which was to make Giacomo Boncompagni, the nephew of Pope Gregory, King of Ireland.
Stukley was provided by the Pope with infantry and sailed from Civitavecchia in Rome with 1000 men in March 1578, including pardoned highwaymen, musketeers and some professional officers, including Hercules of Pisano and Sebastiano di San Giuseppe of Bologna.
In July 1580, Fiach McHugh O'Byrne, based in the Wicklow Mountains launched the rebellion in the east of Ireland.
In August, John of Desmond and Nicholas Sanders met Baltinglass in Laois to try to co-ordinate their forces, but aside from limited co-operation in the Barrow valley region, they were unable to forge a common strategy.
Sir Henry Sidney, the former Lord Deputy of Ireland influenced the response from his membership of the Privy council and in August 1580 a new Lord Deputy, Arthur Grey, 14th Baron Grey de Wilton was sent from England with 6000 troops.
On 25 August 1580, English forces under Grey were routed in the Battle of Glenmalure with the forces of O'Byrne and Viscount Baltinglass.
The rebellion and its aftermath saw a number of people from the Pale and other Old English areas such as Wexford (who had previously always been loyal to English authority) hanged as traitors.
The ferocity of Desmond's actions were repaid in kind by the Crown forces early in the following year.
In March 1580, the Crown forces had an important strategic victory, taking the Desmond stronghold at Carrigafoyle Castle at the mouth of the Shannon.
It looked as if the rebellion was beaten by the summer of 1580, but it was revived by the outbreak of new rebellion in the eastern province of Leinster.
Kathmandu Municipal Corporation, abbreviated KMC, is the chief nodal agency for the administration of Kathmandu.
Kathmandu is headquarters of the surrounding Kathmandu District.
The Metropolitan Police is the main law enforcement agency in the city.
The fire service, known as the Barun Yantra Karyalaya, opened its first station in Kathmandu in 1937 with a single vehicle [REF].
Electricity in Kathmandu is regulated and distributed by the NEA Nepal Electricity Authority.
There is no proper waste management in Kathmandu, so rubbish piles up on roads, pavements and in waterways [REF].
Waste management may be through composting in municipal waste management units, and at houses with home composting units.
Archaeological excavations in parts of Kathmandu have found evidence of ancient civilizations.
The earliest Western reference to Kathmandu appears in an account of Jesuit Fathers Johann Grueber and Albert d'Orville.
The ancient history of Kathmandu is described in its traditional myths and legends.
Kotirudra Samhita of Shiva Purana, Chapter 11, shloka 18 refers to the place as Nayapala city, which was famous for its Pashupati Shivalinga.
Very few historical records exist of the period before the medieval Licchavis rulers.
The Licchavis from the Indo-Gangetic plain migrated north and defeated the Kiratas, establishing the Licchavi dynasty, circa 400 AD.
Eventually, the Licchavi ruler Gunakamadeva merged Koligram and Dakshin Koligram, founding the city of Kathmandu [REF].
The Licchavi era was followed by the Malla era.
The Gorkha Kingdom ended the Malla confederation after the Battle of Kathmandu in 1768.
Rana rule over Nepal started with the Kot Massacre, which occurred near Hanuman Dhoka Durbar.
Kathmandu is in the northwestern part of the Kathmandu Valley to the north of the Bagmati River and covers an area of .
Kathmandu is dissected by eight rivers, the main river of the valley, the Bagmati and its tributaries, of which the Bishnumati, Dhobi Khola, Manohara Khola, Hanumant Khola, and Tukucha Khola are predominant.
Kathmandu and its valley are in the Deciduous Monsoon Forest Zone (altitude range of ), one of five vegetation zones defined for Nepal.
Kathmandu and adjacent cities are composed of neighborhoods, which are utilized quite extensively and more familiar among locals.
There is no officially defined agglomeration of Kathmandu.
Five major climatic regions are found in Nepal.
The city generally has a climate with warm days followed by cool nights and mornings.
|source 2 = Danish Meteorological Institute (sun and relative humidity),[REF] Sistema de Clasificación Bioclimática Mundial (extremes) [REF] .
Kathmandu valley is described as "an enormous treasure house of art and sculptures", which are made of wood, stone, metal, and terracotta, and found in profusion in temples, shrines, stupas, gompas, chaityasm and palaces.
A broad typology has been ascribed to the decorative designs and carvings created by the people of Nepal.
Kathmandu is home to a number of museums and art galleries, including the National Museum of Nepal and the Natural History Museum of Nepal.
The National Museum is in the western part of Kathmandu, near the Swayambhunath stupa in an historical building.
The Natural History Museum is in the southern foothills of Swayambhunath hill and has a sizeable collection of different species of animals, butterflies, and plants.
The Tribhuvan Museum contains artifacts related to the King Tribhuvan (1906-1955).
The enclosed compound of the Narayanhity Palace Museum is in the north-central part of Kathmandu.
The Taragaon Museum presents the modern history of the Kathmandu Valley [REF].
Kathmandu is a center for art in Nepal, displaying the work of contemporary artists in the country and also collections of historical artists.
Kathmandu contains many notable art galleries.
The Srijana Contemporary Art Gallery, inside the Bhrikutimandap Exhibition grounds, hosts the work of contemporary painters and sculptors, and regularly organizes exhibitions.
The National Library of Nepal is in Patan.
The Asa Archives are also noteworthy.
Kathmandu is home to Nepali cinema and theaters.
Kathmandu has a number of movie theatres (old single screen establishments and some new multiplexes) showing Nepali, Bollywood, and Hollywood films.
Kathmandu is the centre of music and dance in Nepal, and these art forms are integral to understanding the city.
A number of hippies visited Kathmandu during the 1970s and introduced rock and roll, rock, and jazz to the city.
The city has been referenced in numerous songs, including works by Cat Stevens ('Katmandu', Mona Bone Jakon (1970)), Bob Seger ('Katmandu', Beautiful Loser (1975)), Rush ('A Passage to Bangkok', Pulling into Kathmandu; 2112, 1976), Krematorij ('Kathmandu', Three Springs (2000)) and Fito Páez (Tráfico por Katmandú - "Traffic through Kathmandu").
The staple food of most people in Kathmandu is dal bhat.
Most of the cuisines found in Kathmandu are non-vegetarian.
Kathmandu had only one western-style restaurant in 1955 [REF].
Kathmandu has a larger proportion of tea drinkers than coffee drinkers.
Most of the fairs and festivals in Kathmandu originated in the Malla period or earlier.
Cultural continuity has been maintained for centuries in the exclusive worship of goddesses and deities in Kathmandu and the rest of the country.
Some of the traditional festivals observed in Kathmandu, apart from those previously mentioned, are Bada Dashain, Tihar, Chhath, Maghe Sankranti, Naga Panchami, Janai Poornima, Pancha Dan, Teej/Rishi Panchami, Pahan Charhe, Jana Baha Dyah Jatra (White Machchhendranath Jatra), and Matatirtha Aunsi [REF].
Assumedly, together with the kingdom of Licchhavi (c.
The Bagmati River which flows through Kathmandu is considered a holy river both by Hindus and Buddhists, and many Hindu temples are on the banks of this river.
Buddhism started in Kathmandu with the arrival of Buddhist monks during the time of Buddha (c.
During the Hindu Lichchavi era (c.
Legendary Princess Bhrikuti (7th-century) and artist Araniko (1245-1306 AD) from that tradition of Kathmandu valley played a significant role in spreading Buddhism in Tibet and China.
Kirant Mundhum is one of the indigenous animistic practices of Nepal.
Sikhism is practiced primarily in Gurudwara at Kupundole.
Healthcare in Kathmandu is the most developed in Nepal, and the city and surrounding valley is home to some of the best hospitals and clinics in the country.
The city is supported by specialist hospitals/clinics such as Shahid Shukra Tropical Hospital, Shahid Gangalal Foundation, Kathmandu Veterinary Hospital, Nepal Eye Hospital, Kanti Children's Hospital, Nepal International Clinic (Travel and Mountain medicine center), Neuro Center, Spinal Rehabilitation center and Bhaktapur Cancer Hospital.
Tilganga Institute of Ophthalmology is an Ophthalmological hospital in Kathmandu.
The total length of roads in Nepal is recorded to be (), as of 2003-04.
The main international airport serving Kathmandu and thus Nepal is the Tribhuvan International Airport, about from the city centre.
Ropeways are another important transportation means in hilly terrain.
The city of Kathmandu is named after Kasthamandap temple, that stood in Durbar Square.
The colophons of ancient manuscripts, dated as late as the 20th century, refer to Kathmandu as Kāṣṭhamaṇḍap Mahānagar in Nepal Mandala.
Among the indigenous Newar people, Kathmandu is known as Yeṃ Deśa (येँ देश), and Patan and Bhaktapur are known as Yala Deśa (यल देश) and Khwopa Deśa (ख्वप देश) [REF].
The location and terrain of Kathmandu have played a significant role in the development of a stable economy which spans millennia.
Kathmandu is the most important industrial and commercial center in Nepal.
The economic output of the metropolitan area alone is worth more than one third of national GDP around $6.5billion in terms of nominal GDP NR.s 550 billion approximately per year $2200 per capital income approx three times national average [REF].
Tourism is considered another important industry in Nepal.
Since then, tourism in Nepal has thrived; it is the country's most important industry [REF].
The neighbourhood of Thamel is Kathmandu's primary "traveller's ghetto", packed with guest houses, restaurants, shops, and bookstores, catering to tourists.
With the opening of the tourist industry after the change in the political scenario of Nepal in 1950, the hotel industry drastically improved [REF].
The ancient trade route between India and Tibet that passed through Kathmandu enabled a fusion of artistic and architectural traditions from other cultures to be amalgamated with local art and architecture [REF].
The literal meaning of Durbar Square is a "place of palaces".
Hanuman Dhoka is a complex of structures with the Royal Palace of the Malla kings and of the Shah dynasty.
Kumari Ghar is a palace in the center of the Kathmandu city, next to the Durbar square where a Royal Kumari selected from several Kumaris resides.
Kasthamandap is a three-storeyed temple enshrining an image of Gorakhnath.
The Pashupatinath Temple is a famous 5th century Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Shiva (Pashupati).
Believers in Pashupatinath (mainly Hindus) are allowed to enter the temple premises, but non-Hindu visitors are allowed to view the temple only from the across the Bagmati River [REF].
The temple is built in the pagoda style of architecture, with cubic constructions, carved wooden rafters (tundal) on which they rest, and two-level roofs made of copper and gold.
The Boudhanath, (also written Bouddhanath, Bodhnath, Baudhanath or the Khāsa Chaitya), is one of the holiest Buddhist sites in Nepal, along with Swayambhu.
The base of the stupa has 108 small depictions of the Dhyani Buddha Amitabha.
Ranipokhari is a historic artificial pond in the heart of Kathmandu.
Kathmandu is the television hub of Nepal.
Nepal Republic Media, the publisher of MyRepublica, joined a publishing alliance with the International Herald Tribune (IHT), to publish the Asia Pacific Edition of IHT from Kathmandu from 20 July 2011 [REF].
Radio Nepal is a state-run organization which operates national and regional radio stations.
Football and cricket are the most popular sports among the younger generation in Nepal and there are several stadiums in the city [REF].
Kathmandu is also home of some of the oldest cricket clubs in Nepal, such as Yengal Sports Club.
An international stadium for swimming events is in Satdobato, Lalitpur, near Kathmandu.
Kathmandu's urban cosmopolitan character has made it the most populous city in Nepal, recording a population of 671,846 residents living in 235,387 households in the metropolitan area, according to the 2001 census [REF].
Over the years the city has been home to people of various ethnicities, resulting in a range of different traditions and cultural practices.
The largest ethnic groups are Newar (29.6%),
The linguistic profile of Kathmandu underwent drastic changes during the Shah dynasty's rule because of its strong bias towards the Brahminic culture.
In 1933, Indian Muslims, especially from the United Provinces, began to urge Jinnah to return to India and take up again his leadership of the Muslim League, an organisation which had fallen into inactivity.
Among those who met with Jinnah to seek his return was Liaquat Ali Khan, who would be a major political associate of Jinnah in the years to come and the first Prime Minister of Pakistan.
Muslims of Bombay elected Jinnah, though then absent in London, as their representative to the Central Legislative Assembly in October 1934.[REF]
According to Singh, "the events of 1937 had a tremendous, almost a traumatic effect upon Jinnah".
In the next two years, Jinnah worked to build support among Muslims for the League.
The alliance between Gandhi and the Khilafat faction did not last long, and the campaign of resistance proved less effective than hoped, as India's institutions continued to function.
Birkenhead in 1928 challenged Indians to come up with their own proposal for constitutional change for India; in response, the Congress convened a committee under the leadership of Motilal Nehru.
After Baldwin was defeated at the 1929 British parliamentary election, Ramsay MacDonald of the Labour Party became prime minister.
In 1931, Fatima Jinnah joined her brother in England.
Dina Wadia, Jinnah's daughter, remained in India after independence before ultimately settling in New York City.
The Jinnah House in Malabar Hill, Bombay, is in the possession of the Government of India, but the issue of its ownership has been disputed by the Government of Pakistan [REF].
After Jinnah died, his sister Fatima asked the court to execute Jinnah's will under Shia Islamic law [REF].
According to Singh, "With Jinnah's death Pakistan lost its moorings.
Jinnah is depicted on all Pakistani rupee currency, and is the namesake of many Pakistani public institutions.
There is a considerable amount of scholarship on Jinnah which stems from Pakistan; according to Akbar S. Ahmed, it is not widely read outside the country and usually avoids even the slightest criticism of Jinnah.
According to historian Ayesha Jalal, while there is a tendency towards hagiography in the Pakistani view of Jinnah, in India he is viewed negatively.
Jinnah has gained the admiration of Indian nationalist politicians such as Lal Krishna Advani, whose comments praising Jinnah caused an uproar in his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) [REF].
Jinnah was the central figure of the 1998 film Jinnah, which was documented on Jinnah's life and his struggle for the creation of Pakistan.
The view of Jinnah in the West has been shaped to some extent by his portrayal in Sir Richard Attenborough's 1982 film, Gandhi.
In a journal article on Pakistan's first governor-general, historian R. J. Moore wrote that Jinnah is universally recognised as central to the creation of Pakistan [REF].
Few individuals significantly alter the course of history.
At the age of 20, Jinnah began his practice in Bombay, the only Muslim barrister in the city.
As a lawyer, Jinnah gained fame for his skilled handling of the 1907 "Caucus Case".
One of Jinnah's fellow barristers from the Bombay High Court remembered that "Jinnah's faith in himself was incredible"; he recalled that on being admonished by a judge with "Mr.
He was what God made him, a great pleader.
In 1857, many Indians had risen in revolt against British rule.
Jinnah devoted much of his time to his law practice in the early 1900s, but remained politically involved.
Although Jinnah initially opposed separate electorates for Muslims, he used this means to gain his first elective office in 1909, as Bombay's Muslim representative on the Imperial Legislative Council.
In December 1912, Jinnah addressed the annual meeting of the Muslim League although he was not yet a member.
Jinnah's moderate faction in the Congress was undermined by the deaths of Mehta and Gokhale in 1915; he was further isolated by the fact that Naoroji was in London, where he remained until his death in 1917.
During the war, Jinnah joined other Indian moderates in supporting the British war effort, hoping that Indians would be rewarded with political freedoms.
In 1918, Jinnah married his second wife Rattanbai Petit ("Ruttie"), 24 years his junior.
Relations between Indians and British were strained in 1919 when the Imperial Legislative Council extended emergency wartime restrictions on civil liberties
The well documented influence of Muhammad Iqbal on Jinnah, with regards to taking the lead in creating Pakistan, has been described as "significant", "powerful" and even "unquestionable" by scholars [REF].
Iqbal's influence also brought about a deeper appreciation for Muslim identity within Jinnah [REF].
In a public speech in 1940 following the death of Iqbal, Jinnah expressed his preference for implementing Iqbal's vision even at the expense of becoming a ruler.
Jinnah's given name at birth was Mahomedali, and was born most likely in 1876, to Jinnahbhai Poonja and his wife Mithibai, in a rented apartment on the second floor of Wazir Mansion near Karachi, Sind[REF] now in Pakistan, but then within the Bombay Presidency of British India.
As a boy, Jinnah lived for a time in Bombay with an aunt and may have attended the Gokal Das Tej Primary School there, later on studying at the Cathedral and John Connon School.
In 1892, Sir Frederick Leigh Croft, a business associate of Jinnahbhai Poonja, offered young Jinnah a London apprenticeship with his firm, Graham's Shipping and Trading Company.
Soon after his arrival in London, Jinnah gave up the apprenticeship in order to study law, enraging his father, who had, before his departure, given him enough money to live for three years.
During his student years in England, Jinnah was influenced by 19th-century British liberalism, like many other future Indian independence leaders.
The Western world not only inspired Jinnah in his political life, but also greatly influenced his personal preferences, particularly when it came to dress.
Dissatisfied with the law, Jinnah briefly embarked on a stage career with a Shakespearean company, but resigned after receiving a stern letter from his father.
Until the late 1930s, most Muslims of the British Raj expected, upon independence, to be part of a unitary state encompassing all of British India, as did the Hindus and others who advocated self-government.
Although many leaders of the Congress sought a strong central government for an Indian state, some Muslim politicians, including Jinnah, were unwilling to accept this without powerful protections for their community.
Events which separated the communities included the failed attempt to form a coalition government including the Congress and the League in the United Provinces following the 1937 election.
Balraj Puri in his journal article about Jinnah suggests that the Muslim League president, after the 1937 vote, turned to the idea of partition in "sheer desperation".
On 3 September 1939, British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain announced the commencement of war with Nazi Germany.
With the British and Muslims to some extent cooperating, the Viceroy asked Jinnah for an expression of the Muslim League's position on self-government, confident that it would differ greatly from that of the Congress.
Gandhi's reaction to the Lahore Resolution was muted; he called it "baffling", but told his disciples that Muslims, in common with other people of India, had the right to self-determination.
The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 brought the United States into the war.
The Congress followed the failed Cripps mission by demanding, in August 1942, that the British immediately "Quit India", proclaiming a mass campaign of satyagraha until they did.
In September 1944, Jinnah and Gandhi, who had by then been released from his palatial prison, met formally at the Muslim leader's home on Malabar Hill in Bombay.
Field Marshal Viscount Wavell succeeded Linlithgow as Viceroy in 1943.
The British people returned Clement Attlee and his Labour Party later in July.
In February 1946, the British Cabinet resolved to send a delegation to India to negotiate with leaders there.
The Congress soon joined the new Indian ministry.
The Congress endorsed the joint statement from the London conference over the angry dissent from some elements.
Following the failure of the London trip, Jinnah was in no hurry to reach an agreement, considering that time would allow him to gain the undivided provinces of Bengal and Punjab for Pakistan, but these wealthy, populous provinces had sizeable non-Muslim minorities, complicating a settlement.
On 20 February 1947, Attlee announced Mountbatten's appointment, and that Britain would transfer power in India not later than June 1948.
Mountbatten had been warned in his briefing papers that Jinnah would be his "toughest customer" who had proved a chronic nuisance because "no one in this country [India] had so far gotten into Jinnah's mind".
Jinnah feared that at the end of the British presence in India, they would turn control over to the Congress-dominated constituent assembly, putting Muslims at a disadvantage in attempting to win autonomy.
On 4 July 1947, Liaquat asked Mountbatten on Jinnah's behalf to recommend to the British king, George VI, that Jinnah be appointed Pakistan's first governor-general.
The Radcliffe Commission, dividing Bengal and Punjab, completed its work and reported to Mountbatten on 12 August; the last Viceroy held the maps until the 17th, not wanting to spoil the independence celebrations in both nations.
Jinnah had a troublesome ordeal with NWFP.
Along with Liaquat and Abdur Rab Nishtar, Jinnah represented Pakistan's interests in the Division Council to appropriately divide public assets between India and Pakistan.
The Indian Princely States, of which there were several hundred, were advised by the departing British to choose whether to join Pakistan or India.
The most contentious of the disputes was, and continues to be, that over the princely state of Kashmir.
Some historians allege that Jinnah's courting the rulers of Hindu-majority states and his gambit with Junagadh are evidence of ill-intent towards India, as Jinnah had promoted separation by religion, yet tried to gain the accession of Hindu-majority states.
In January 1948, the Indian government finally agreed to pay Pakistan its share of British India's assets.
In March, Jinnah, despite his declining health, made his only post-independence visit to East Pakistan.
After the establishment of Pakistan, it continued to use Reserve Bank of India notes that had the image of George VI printed on them.
From the 1930s, Jinnah suffered from tuberculosis; only his sister and a few others close to him were aware of his condition.
In June 1948, he and Fatima flew to Quetta, in the mountains of Balochistan, where the weather was cooler than in Karachi.
On 6 July 1948, Jinnah returned to Quetta, but at the advice of doctors, soon journeyed to an even higher retreat at Ziarat.
By 9 September, Jinnah had also developed pneumonia.
Indian Prime Minister Jawahar Lal Nehru stated upon Jinnah's death, "How shall we judge him?
In 1972 three hijackers took control of a domestic passenger flight along the east coast of the U.S. and threatened to crash the plane into a U.S. nuclear weapons plant in Oak Ridge, Tennessee.
Various acts of civil disobedience since 1980 by the peace group Plowshares have shown how nuclear weapons facilities can be penetrated, and the group's actions represent extraordinary breaches of security at nuclear weapons plants in the United States.
Stuxnet is a computer worm discovered in June 2010 that is believed to have been created by the United States and Israel to attack Iran's nuclear facilities [REF].
The United States first began developing nuclear weapons during World War II under the order of President Franklin Roosevelt in 1939, motivated by the fear that they were engaged in a race with Nazi Germany to develop such a weapon.
By investing heavily in breeding plutonium in early nuclear reactors and in the electromagnetic and gaseous diffusion enrichment processes for the production of uranium-235, the United States was able to develop three usable weapons by mid-1945.
Between 1945 and 1990, more than 70,000 total warheads were developed, in over 65 different varieties, ranging in yield from around .01 kilotons (such as the man-portable Davy Crockett shell) to the 25 megaton B41 bomb [REF].
Richland, Washington was the first city established to support plutonium production at the nearby Hanford nuclear site, to power the American nuclear weapons arsenals.
After the end of the Cold War following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the U.S. nuclear program was heavily curtailed, halting its program of nuclear testing, ceasing production of new nuclear weapons, and reducing its stockpile by half by the mid-1990s under President Bill Clinton.
During the presidency of George W. Bush, and especially after the 11 September terrorist attacks of 2001, rumors have circulated in major news sources that the U.S. has been considering design of new nuclear weapons ("bunker-busting nukes"), and the resumption of nuclear testing for reasons of stockpile stewardship.
Command and control procedures in case of nuclear war were given by the Single Integrated Operational Plan (SIOP) until 2003, when this was superseded by Operations Plan 8044.
A nuclear strike must be authorized by the President or, if he or she has been killed, by a surviving member of the nuclear chain of command [REF].
When President Reagan was shot in 1981 there was confusion about where the "nuclear football" was, and who was in charge [REF].
In 1975 a launch crew member, Harold Hering, was dismissed from the Air Force for asking how he could know whether the order to launch his missiles came from a sane president.
It has been claimed that the system is not foolproof [REF].
The United States is one of the five recognized nuclear powers by the signatories of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
In 2009 and 2010, the administration of President Barack Obama declared policies that would invalidate the Bush-era policy for use of nuclear weapons and its motions to develop new ones.
The Obama Administration, in its release of the 2012 defense budget, included plans to modernize, as well as maintain, the nation's nuclear weapons arsenal [REF].
The original Little Boy and Fat Man weapons, developed by the United States during the Manhattan Project, were relatively large (Fat Man had a diameter of ) and heavy (around 5 tons each) and required specially modified bomber planes to be adapted for their bombing missions against Japan.
Through the aid of brainpower acquired through Operation Paperclip at the tail end of the European theater of World War II, the United States was able to embark on an ambitious program in rocketry.
Development of long-range bombers, such as the B-29 Superfortress during World War II, was continued during the Cold War period.
During the 1950s and 1960s, elaborate computerized early warning systems such as Defense Support Program were developed to detect incoming Soviet attacks and to coordinate response strategies.
Improvements in warhead miniaturization in the 1970s and 1980s allowed for the development of MIRVs-missiles which could carry multiple warheads, each of which could be separately targeted.
Additional developments in weapons delivery included cruise missile systems, which allowed a plane to fire a long-distance, low-flying nuclear-tipped missile towards a target from a relatively comfortable distance.
The current delivery systems of the U.S. make virtually any part of the Earth's surface within the reach of its nuclear arsenal.
The initial U.S. nuclear program was run by the National Bureau of Standards starting in 1939 under the edict of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
This was the beginning of the Manhattan Project, run as the Manhattan Engineering District (MED), an agency under military control that was in charge of developing the first atomic weapons.
ERDA was short-lived, however, and in 1977 the U.S. nuclear weapons activities were reorganized under the Department of Energy,[REF] which maintains such responsibilities through the semi-autonomous National Nuclear Security Administration.
In general, these agencies served to coordinate research and build sites.
Between 16 July 1945 and 23 September 1992, the United States maintained a program of vigorous nuclear testing, with the exception of a moratorium between November 1958 and September 1961.
The U.S. program of atmospheric nuclear testing exposed a number of the population to the hazards of fallout.
Operation Crossroads series in July 1946, was the first postwar test series and one of the largest military operations in U.S. history.
Operation Greenhouse shots of May 1951 included the first boosted fission weapon test ("Item") and a scientific test that proved the feasibility of thermonuclear weapons ("George").
Ivy Mike shot of 1 November 1952, was the first full test of a Teller-Ulam design "staged" hydrogen bomb, with a yield of 10 megatons.
Castle Bravo shot of 1 March 1954, was the first test of a deployable (solid fuel) thermonuclear weapon, and also (accidentally) the largest weapon ever tested by the United States (15 megatons).
Shot Argus I of Operation Argus, on 27 August 1958, was the first detonation of a nuclear weapon in outer space when a 1.7-kiloton warhead was detonated at an altitude of during a series of high altitude nuclear explosions.
Shot Frigate Bird of Operation Dominic I on 6 May 1962, was the only U.S. test of an operational submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) with a live nuclear warhead (yield of 600 kilotons), at Christmas Island.
Shot Sedan of Operation Storax on 6 July 1962 (yield of 104 kilotons), was an attempt to show the feasibility of using nuclear weapons for "civilian" and "peaceful" purposes as part of Operation Plowshare.
A summary table of each of the American operational series may be found at United States' nuclear test series.
In the early 1980s, the revival of the nuclear arms race triggered large protests about nuclear weapons [REF].
There have also been protests by anti-nuclear groups at the Y-12 Nuclear Weapons Plant,[REF] the Idaho National Laboratory,[REF] Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository proposal,[REF] the Hanford Site, the Nevada Test Site,[REF] Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,[REF] and transportation of nuclear waste from the Los Alamos National Laboratory [REF].
On May 1, 2005, 40,000 anti-nuclear/anti-war protesters marched past the United Nations in New York, 60 years after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki [REF].
Some scientists and engineers have opposed nuclear weapons, including Paul M. Doty, Hermann Joseph Muller, Linus Pauling, Eugene Rabinowitch, M.V. Ramana and Frank N. von Hippel.
Early on in the development of its nuclear weapons, the United States relied in part on information-sharing with both the United Kingdom and Canada, as codified in the Quebec Agreement of 1943.
Since this path was chosen, the United States was, in its early days, essentially an advocate for the prevention of nuclear proliferation, though primarily for the reason of self-preservation.
The United States is one of the five nuclear weapons states permitted to maintain a nuclear arsenal under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, of which it was an original drafter and signatory on 1 July 1968 (ratified 5 March 1970).
After India and Pakistan tested nuclear weapons in 1998, President Bill Clinton imposed economic sanctions on the countries.
The U.S. government has officially taken a silent policy towards the nuclear weapons ambitions of the state of Israel, while being exceedingly vocal against proliferation of such weapons in the countries of Iran and North Korea.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) proposed a 2005 ban on fissile material that would greatly limit the production of weapons of mass destruction.
The geography of Southampton is influenced by the sea and rivers.
Town Quay is the original public quay, and dates from the 13th century.
Southampton Water has the benefit of a double high tide, with two high tide peaks,[REF] making the movement of large ships easier [REF].
The city lies in the Hampshire Basin, which sits atop chalk beds [REF].
The River Test runs along the western border of the city, separating it from the New Forest.
Southampton is divided into council wards, suburbs, constituencies, ecclesiastical parishes, and other less formal areas.
Council estates are in the Weston, Thornhill and Townhill Park districts.
In the 2006/07, 1,267 residential dwellings were built in the city-the highest number for 15 years.
There are 16 Electoral Wards in Southampton, each consisting of longer-established neighbourhoods (see below).
Settlements outside the city are sometimes considered suburbs of Southampton, including Chartwell Green, Chilworth, Nursling, Rownhams, Totton, Eastleigh and West End.
As with the rest of the UK, Southampton experiences an oceanic climate (Köppen Cfb).
The centre of Southampton is located above a large hot water aquifer that provides geothermal power to some of the city's buildings.
At the 2001 Census, 92.4 per cent of the city's populace was White-including one per cent White Irish-3.8 per cent were South Asian, 1.0 per cent Black, 1.3 per cent Chinese or other ethnic groups, and 1.5 per cent were of Mixed Race [REF].
Southampton had an estimated 236,900 people living within the city boundary in 2011 [REF].
There are 119,500 males within the city and 117,400 females [REF].
Between 1996 and 2004, the population of the city increased by 4.9 per cent-the tenth biggest increase in England [REF].
In March 2007 there were 120,305 jobs in Southampton, and 3,570 people claiming job seeker's allowance, approximately 2.4 per cent of the city's population [REF].
In June 2006, 74.7 per cent of the city's population were classed as economically active [REF].
Just over a quarter of the jobs available in the city are in the health and education sector.
In January 2007, the average annual salary in the city was £22,267.
Southampton has always been a port, and the docks have long been a major employer in the city.
During the latter half of the 20th century, a more diverse range of industry also came to the city, including aircraft and car manufacture, cables, electrical engineering products, and petrochemicals.
University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust is one of the city's largest employers.
Other major employers in the city include Ordnance Survey, the UK's national mapping agency, whose headquarters is located in a new building on the outskirts of the city, opened in February 2011 [REF].
Southampton's largest retail centre, and 35th largest in the UK, is the Westquay Shopping Centre, which opened in September 2000 and hosts major high street stores including John Lewis and Marks and Spencer.
Southampton's strong economy is promoting redevelopment, and major projects are proposed, including the city's first skyscrapers on the waterfront.
According to 2004 figures, Southampton contributes around £4.2 bn to the regional economy annually.
People hailing from Southampton are called sotonians [REF].
Novelist Jane Austen lived in Southampton for a number of years[REF] and the city has also been home to a number of artists, including Edward John Gregory,[REF] Hubert von Herkomer[REF] and John Everett Millais [REF].
Sportspeople born in Southampton include rugby union player Mike Brown[REF] and Australian tennis player Wally Masur [REF].
Richard Aslatt Pearce, the first deaf-mute Anglican clergyman, was born in Portswood, Southampton [REF].
The city has a strong higher education sector.
The University of Southampton, which was founded in 1862 and received its Royal Charter as a university in 1952, has over 22,000 students [REF].
Southampton Solent University has 17,000[REF] students and its strengths are in the training, design, consultancy, research and other services undertaken for business and industry [REF].
There are also independent schools, including The Gregg School, King Edward VI School and St Mary's College.
Over 40 per cent of school pupils in the city that responded to a survey claimed to have been the victim of bullying.
It has been revealed that Southampton has the worst behaved secondary schools within the UK.
Southampton's police service is provided by Hampshire Constabulary.
Southampton's fire cover is provided by Hampshire Fire and Rescue Service.
The ambulance service is provided by South Central Ambulance Service.
The national headquarters of the Maritime and Coastguard Agency is located in Commercial Road.
Archaeological finds suggest that the area has been inhabited since the stone age [REF].
The Anglo-Saxons formed a new, larger, settlement across the Itchen centred on what is now the St Mary's area of the city.
Viking raids from 840 onwards contributed to the decline of Hamwic in the 9th century,[REF] and by the 10th century a fortified settlement, which became medieval Southampton, had been established [REF].
Following the Norman Conquest in 1066, Southampton became the major port of transit between the then capital of England, Winchester, and Normandy.
The Franciscan friary in Southampton was founded circa 1233 [REF].
The friars granted use of the water to the town in 1310 [REF].
The town was sacked in 1338 by French, Genoese and Monegasque ships (under Charles Grimaldi, who used the plunder to help found the principality of Monaco) [REF].
In 1348, the Black Death reached England via merchant vessels calling at Southampton [REF].
The city walls include God's House Tower, built in 1417, the first purpose-built artillery fortification in England [REF].
During the Middle Ages, shipbuilding had become an important industry for the town.
The friars passed on ownership of the water supply system itself to the town in 1420 [REF].
On the other hand, many of the medieval buildings once situated within the town walls are now in ruins or have disappeared altogether.
The friary was dissolved in 1538 but its ruins remained until they were swept away in the 1940s [REF].
The port was the point of departure for the Pilgrim Fathers aboard Mayflower in 1620 [REF].
Southampton engineer Walter Taylor's 18th century mechanisation of the block-making process was a significant step in the Industrial Revolution [REF].
Southampton has been used for military embarkation, including during 18th-century wars with the French,[REF] the Crimean war,[REF] and the Boer War [REF].
Southampton became a spa town in 1740 [REF].
The town experienced major expansion during the Victorian era [REF].
From 1904 to 2004, the Thornycroft shipbuilding yard was a major employer in Southampton,[REF] building and repairing ships used in the two World Wars [REF].
The Supermarine Spitfire was designed and developed in Southampton, evolving from the Schneider trophy-winning seaplanes of the 1920s and 1930s.
630 people lost their lives as a result of the air raids on Southampton and nearly 2,000 more were injured, not to mention the thousands of buildings damaged or destroyed [REF].
Pockets of Georgian architecture survived the war, but much of the city was levelled.
A Royal Charter in 1952[REF] upgraded University College at Highfield to the University of Southampton [REF].
After the establishment of Hampshire County Council, following the act in 1888, Southampton became a county borough within the county of Hampshire, which meant that it had many features of a county, but governance was now shared between the Corporation in Southampton and the new county council.
The city has undergone many changes to its governance over the centuries and once again became administratively independent from Hampshire County as it was made into a unitary authority in a local government reorganisation on 1 April 1997, a result of the 1992 Local Government Act.
Southampton City Council consists of 48 councillors, 3 for each of the 16 wards.
The city has a Mayor and is one of the 16 cities and towns in England and Wales to have a ceremonial sheriff who acts as a deputy for the Mayor.
Southampton City Council has developed twinning links with Le Havre in France (since 1973),[REF][REF][REF][REF] Rems-Murr-Kreis in Germany (since 1991),[REF] Trieste in Italy (since 2002); Hampton, Virginia in USA,[REF][REF][REF] Qingdao in China (since 1998),[REF] and Busan in South Korea (since 1978) [REF].
Southampton is a major UK port which has good transport links with the rest of the country.
Southampton is also served by the rail network, which is used both by freight services to and from the docks and passenger services as part of the national rail system.
Local train services operate in the central, southern and eastern sections of the city and are operated by South West Trains, with stations at Swaythling, St Denys, Millbrook, Redbridge, Bitterne, Sholing and Woolston.
The town was the subject of an attempt by a separate company, the Didcot, Newbury and Southampton Railway, to open another rail route to the North in the 1880s and some building work, including a surviving embankment, was undertaken in the Hill Lane area [REF].
Southampton Airport is a regional airport located in the town of Eastleigh, just north of the city.
Southampton's tradition of luxury cruising began in the 1840s, one of the pioneers being P&O who advertised tours to Egypt [REF].
Many of the world's largest cruise ships can regularly be seen in Southampton water, including record-breaking vessels from Royal Caribbean and Carnival Corporation & plc.
The city has a particular connection to Cunard Line and their fleet of ships.
At certain times of the year, The Queen Mary 2, Queen Elizabeth and Queen Victoria may all visit Southampton at the same time, in an event commonly called 'Arrival of the Three Queens'.
The importance of Southampton to the cruise industry was indicated by P&O Cruises's 175th anniversary celebrations, which included all seven of the company's liners visiting Southampton in a single day.
While Southampton is no longer the base for any cross-channel ferries, it is the terminus for three internal ferry services, all of which operate from terminals at Town Quay.
Southampton used to be home to a number of ferry services to the continent, with destinations such as San Sebastian, Lisbon, Tangier and Casablanca.
Buses now provide the majority of local public transport.
There are two main termini for bus services.
The annual Southampton Boat Show is held in September each year, with over 600 exhibitors present [REF].
There are many innovative art galleries in the city.
In August 2009, work began on a significant project to create a Cultural Quarter in the city centre, on land adjacent to the Guildhall [REF].
Southampton has two large live music venues, the Mayflower Theatre (formerly the Gaumont Theatre) and the Guildhall.
The city is home or birthplace to a number of contemporary musicians such as R'n'B singer Craig David, Coldplay drummer Will Champion, former Holloways singer Rob Skipper as well as 1980s popstar Howard Jones.
Local media include the Southern Daily Echo newspaper based in Redbridge and BBC South, which has its regional headquarters in the city centre opposite the civic centre.
Southampton also has 2 community FM radio stations, the Queens Award-winning Unity 101 Community Radio ( www.unity101.org)
Southampton is home to Southampton Football Club-nicknamed "The Saints"-the club plays in the Premier League at St Mary's Stadium, having relocated in 2001 from their 103-year-old former stadium, "The Dell".
The two local Sunday Leagues in the Southampton area are the City of Southampton Sunday Football League and the Southampton and District Sunday Football League.
Hampshire County Cricket Club play close to the city, at the Rose Bowl in West End, after previously playing at the County Cricket Ground and the Antelope Ground, both near the city centre.
The city hockey club, Southampton Hockey Club, founded in 1938, is now one of the largest and highly regarded clubs in Hampshire, fielding 7 senior men's and 5 senior ladies teams on a weekly basis along with boys' and girls' teams from 6 upwards.
The city is also well provided for in amateur men's and women's rugby with a number of teams in and around the city, the oldest of which is Trojans RFC who were promoted to London South West 2 division in 2008/9.
The city provides for yachting and water sports, with a number of marinas.
Southampton was named "fittest city in the UK" in 2006 by Men's Fitness magazine.
Southampton is also home to one of the most successful College American Football teams in the UK, the Southampton Stags, who play at the Wide Lane Sports Facility in Eastleigh.
The world's oldest surviving bowling green is the Southampton Old Bowling Green, which was first used in 1299 [REF].
St Michael and All Angels (Anglican).
St. John the Baptist (Anglican).
The Unitarian Chapel, originally called the Old Meeting House, was built c. 1695.
The Jehovah's Witness Kingdom Hall.
Tenterden Borough Council was the local authority from the time of its first Mayor, Thomas Petlesden in 1449,[REF] until the Local Government Reorganisation in 1974, at which time the former borough of Tenterden came under the control of Ashford Borough Council.
Essential services such as education, transportation, social services and public safety are the responsibility of Kent County Council.
Ashford Borough Council is the district authority, and as such is responsible for waste collection & recycling, street cleaning, licensing, planning, housing, environmental issues, cemeteries, parking, tourism and tax collection.
Benn Barham, professional British golfer.
William Caxton, thought to be the first English person to work as a printer and the first to introduce a printing press into England, is reputed to have been born in the town.
Edith Craig (daughter of Ellen Terry), actress, theatre director, producer, costume designer and early pioneer of women's suffrage, lived at Smallhythe Place.
David Frost, media personality and daytime TV game show host, was born in the town.
Kevin Godley (of 10cc and Godley & Creme) was the owner of Heronden Hall and Heronden Gatehouse.
Gary Hume, artist, Royal Academician and Turner Prize nominee.
Roderick Kedward, historian and specialist on Vichy France and the Resistance.
Sholto Marcon, Olympic gold medallist in field hockey, was Vicar of Tenterden.
John Parker, (died 1564), who became a leading statesman and judge in Ireland, began life as a cloth-maker in Tenterden.
Peter Richardson, the former Worcestershire, Kent and England cricketer is a current inhabitant.
Sir Donald Sinden, the actor, lived in the area until his death in 2014, and the local theatre is named after him.
Dame Ellen Terry, the actress, lived for many years at nearby Smallhythe Place (which is now National Trust).
Samuel J. Tilden, who lost the US presidency by one vote in 1876, is descended from the Tilden family of Tenterden.
Thomas Hinckley, (C.1618-1706), Governor Plymouth Colonies 1680-1692, Samuel Hinckley (Father) direct ancestor of presidents George H. W. Bush and George W. Bush, as well as an ancestor of the former president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Gordon B. Hinckley.
The Tenterden and District Chamber of Commerce, a limited company (TDCC Ltd), promotes and supports businesses in Tenterden and the surrounding area.
Its Horticultural Society organises lectures and shows throughout the year in a number of locations around the town.
Tenterden Lions Club was formed in 1958; its members serve the community by giving time to local needs and raising money for local, national and international good causes.
The Tenterden branch of the Mothers' Union is very active, organising lectures and visits on a regular basis.
The National Trust holds regular lectures on a diverse range of subjects at the Junior School on Recreation Ground Road.
The Rotary Club is very active, bringing together local business people in aid of a number of charitable causes.
The Royal British Legion branch in Tenterden has had great success in the annual poppy appeal, and is responsible for the very moving (and well-attended) service at the War Memorial each year on Remembrance Sunday.
The TDRA aims to represent the wishes of its members on a broad range of subjects, allowing the voice of local residents to be heard on a number of platforms that might otherwise be out of reach.
The local amateur dramatic society is TODS, which was founded (in its current form) in 1958, following the merger of a number of different companies.
The local chapter of the East Kent Freemasons is the Weald of Kent Lodge, which undertakes a great deal of charitable work.
The Tenterden Christmas Market is an annual event and in 2016 it is a 3-day event on the last weekend in November; Friday evening, and all day Saturday and Sunday, featuring beautiful Christmas lights, food, produce and craft stalls, Santa's Grotto, Christmas Carols and lots of entertainment.
The May Fayre is arranged by Tenterden Town Council and is held every year on the May Bank Holiday Monday.
Tentertainment is a free music festival which is held on the first weekend in July.
Tenterden Folk Festival is a four-day event held on the first weekend in October each year, and has been running for 21 years.
Kent Police opened Tenterden Police Station in Oaks Road (on the outskirts of the town centre) in 1956, before replacing it with a smaller Front Counter in a retail unit on the High Street at the beginning of the 21st century.
Kent Fire and Rescue Service has an on call fire engine based in St. Michaels, which is still operational as of 2015.
The National Health Service with Kent County Council operate West View Integrated Care Centre (known locally as West View Hospital), providing adult social care and health care on the same site.
The NHS also operates two clinics in the centre of the town.
The first record of dwellings in Tenterden can be found in a charter which mentions that it, as 'Heronden', began to grow from the 14th century around the strong local wool industry.
A school was in existence here in 1521
In 1903, Tenterden Town railway station was opened.
Tenterden is a nodal centre with routes radiating to Rolvenden and Hastings (A28), Wittersham and Rye (B2082), Appledore and New Romney (B2080), Woodchurch and Hamstreet (B2067) and Ashford and Maidstone (A28/A262).
Tenterden's broad, tree-lined High Street offers a selection of shopping facilities, making the town an important destination for a number of smaller towns and villages in the area.
The town also benefits from a leisure centre at the end of Recreation Ground Road, which was opened by Diana, Princess of Wales in 1990, run by Ashford Borough Council.
Tenterden Town Football Club, established in 1889, is based at the Sports Pavilion on the southern half of the recreation ground, where it has played since formation.
Tenterden Tigers Junior Football Club, established in 1996.
Tenterden Cricket Club, based on Smallhythe Road.
The Tour de France raced through the town in July 2007, with a sprint for the Maillot vert (green jersey) taking place in Tenterden.
Homewood Badminton Club was formed over 30 years ago for intermediate and advanced players.
Tenterden Golf Club is by the road Chalk Hill.
1066 Archery Club is based on the outskirts of Tenterden at the Pickhill Business Centre.
Lincoln Continentals from 1939 to 1941 shared largely the same body design with each other; based on the Lincoln-Zephyr, the Continental received few updates from year to year.
For the 1942 model year, all Lincoln models were given squared-up fenders, and a revised grille.
After World War II, the Lincoln division of Ford returned the Continental to production as a 1946 model; Lincoln dropped the Zephyr nomenclature following the war, so the postwar Continental was derived from the standard Lincoln (internally H-Series).
Following the death of Edsel Ford in 1943, Ford Motor Company re-organized its corporate management structure, which led to the 1946 departure of the Continental's designer Bob Gregorie.
The 1939-1948 Continental is recognized as a "Full Classic" by the Classic Car Club of America, one of the last-built cars to be so recognized.
By the late 1980s, the luxury segment in which the Continental competed had changed drastically from a decade before.
Sharing its unibody chassis with the Ford Taurus and Mercury Sable, the 1988 Continental became the first front-wheel drive Lincoln; it was also the first Lincoln since 1948 sold without an available V8 engine.
Power was provided by a 140 hp 3.8L Essex V6 newly introduced to the Taurus/Sable for 1988.
For 1989, the dashboard was redesigned to accommodate dual air bags.
In 1990, a minor exterior update featured a new grille, hood ornament, and taillights.
As part of the redesign, Lincoln simplified the trim lineup; only standard (later named "Executive") and Signature Series remained.
For 1993, an "individual seats" group was available which ditched the usual chrome column shifter and 50/50 "comfort lounge" split bench seating (and 6-passenger capacity) for a center console with floor shifter (a Continental first), storage armrest, and cup holder.
1994 was the last year that the Continental was offered in Executive and Signature Series trims.
A 50th Anniversary Edition Continental Signature Series was offered in 1990 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the model.
Following the debut of the Lincoln Continental concept car at the New York Auto Show in the spring of 2015, the Continental was identified as the successor of the Lincoln MKS which eventually ended production in the summer of 2016.
The tenth generation Continental is based on a front-wheel drive platform, with optional turbocharging and all-wheel drive.
Lincoln offers three trim packages, called Premiere, Select and the top level Reserve.
For 1958, the Continental Division was expanded with two- and four-door vehicles that shared an appearance with Lincoln-branded products; the Continental gained new life as a flagship for the Lincoln line.
To drop the price from $10,000 ($ in current dollars) to a somewhat more accessible $6,000 ($ in current dollars), Lincoln switched the Continental from a hand-built body to a version of the body shared with the Lincoln Capri and Premiere.
In a break from Ford, Mercury, and Edsel, Lincoln adopted unibody construction[REF] for what would be one of the largest cars ever produced by Ford Motor Company and one of the largest unibody-chassis cars ever made in the automotive industry.
For 1959, The Continental Division was merged back into the Lincoln Division, and the Continental Mark IV was introduced as a model of Lincoln rather than a separate brand.
For 1960, Lincoln renamed the Continental the Mark V, with minor styling and exterior updates.
Although less expensive and better-selling than the Continental Mark II, the Lincoln Division lost over $60 million over 1958-1960, partly reflecting the enormous expense of developing what is perhaps the largest unibody car ever made [REF].
Some commentators have suggested that even for an era such as the late 1950s when most American cars were chrome-covered behemoths sporting massive jet-age fins on each side of the trunk, the third generation Continental was "excessively styled" with too many distinctive design features that muddied the design.
George W. Walker, known for his contribution to the original Ford Thunderbird, was Vice-President in charge of Styling at Ford during this time.
Don Delarossa, who succeeded Najjar as Lincoln's Chief Stylist, was responsible for the 1960 Continental update, and went on to become chief designer at Chrysler in the 1980s.
L. David Ash was Lincoln's Executive Exterior Stylist when Najjar was in charge of Lincoln styling, and Ash would later play a prominent role as Chief Stylist of Ford in designing the 1969-1971 Lincoln Continental Mark III.
For the 1995 model year, the Continental was substantially updated with more rounded lines similar to the Mark VIII; the interior also saw a major overhaul.
The sole engine for the Continental was the Modular/InTech 32v DOHC 4.6L V8 shared with the Lincoln Mark VIII, but slightly de-tuned for front wheel drive use.
1995-1996 Continentals had air ride suspension on all four wheels while the 1997 model had rear air suspension and traditional steel coil springs up front.
The Continental was updated again in late 1997 for 1998 with redesigned front and rear end styling.
For 1999, the Continental once again saw only a modest price increase to MSRP $38,525 - the same price as the Town Car.
Between 1999 (2000 model year) and 2002, changes to the Continental remained relatively minor as production of the model eventually came to an end.
For 1996, Lincoln offered two special editions of the Continental.
For 2001, a Limited Edition was offered, featuring unique leather interior with "Limited" embroidery, two-toned interior trim, wood steering wheel, 6-disc CD changer, and 16" spoked aluminum wheels.
To commemorate the end of the model run for 2002, a Collector's Edition was offered featuring a genuine walnut burl steering wheel, instrument panel, and side door trim, "CE" logos, platinum painted grille, 10-spoke chrome wheels, and more.
After several years of decreasing sales, Lincoln announced that 2002 would be the 50th and last year for the Continental.
All Continentals built since 1958 were assembled at Ford's Wixom Assembly Plant.
Lincoln upgraded the LS in 2005-2006 to attract more of the mid-size luxury market left unserved after the discontinuation of the Continental.
For the 1961 model year, the Lincoln Division was extensively redesigned.
Originally slated to be a version of the 1961 Ford Thunderbird model line, the 1961 Continental was modified by Ford design vice president Elwood Engel.
The design was anchored in a "form follows function" simplicity, with a complete absence of ornamentation.
Nevertheless, the car was so much smaller advertising executives at Ford photographed a woman parallel parking a sedan for magazine advertisements.
The most recognized feature of the design of the Continental was the return of rear-hinged doors, last seen in the 1951 Lincolns, to improve access to the rear seat.
Another popular feature was the all-new convertible, where the trunklid would open electrically in a single piece, hinged at the back of the vehicle, then the fabric top would fold down and disappear beneath the trunklid.
The 1961 model was the first car manufactured in the United States to be sold with a or 2-year bumper-to-bumper warranty [REF].
For the Kennedy White House, the Secret Service purchased a convertible parade limousine custom built by Hess & Eisenhardt of Cincinnati, Ohio, from a 1961 Lincoln 4-door convertible.
Regarded as Elwood Engel's magnum opus, the 1961 Continental received some design support from a full size clay model done by staffers Howard Payne and John Orfe in 1958 [REF].
In 1962, a simpler front grille design with floating rectangles and a thin center bar was adopted.
For 1963, in response to customer requests, Lincoln made several changes to the Continental.
For 1964, Lincoln gave the Continental a minor redesign, featuring several updates to further improve interior room.
For 1965, the Continental was given several more updates.
With the facelift, sales improved about 10%, to 40,180 units [REF].
For 1966, a number of changes came to the Continental model line.
Although bearing a strong resemblance to its predecessor, the 1966 Continental was given exterior sheet metal and the interior was again redesigned, featuring the new options of a tape player and a tilt steering wheel [REF].
To improve the sales of the convertible, Lincoln added a glass rear window to the convertible top and improved the hydraulic system for opening the top and trunklid by adding a second pump, separating the two systems; the hydraulic solenoids were also removed from the car as well.
For 1967, few changes were made to the Continental, except for minor trim updates.
After only 2,276 were sold, 1967 was the final year for the convertible [REF].
For 1968, Lincoln made several styling changes to the Continental.
For 1969, the fourth-generation Continental entered its last year of production.
This generation of Continental is favored by collectors and has appeared in many motion pictures, such as Goldfinger, The Matrix, Last Action Hero, Kalifornia, Spider-Man 2, Hit and Run, Animal House, and the Inspector Gadget films.
Following the downsizing and adoption of the Panther platform for the 1980 model year, the Lincoln division was faced with a critical issue.
The Lincoln Continental made its return in early 1981 as a 1982 model.
Using the lessons learned from Lincoln Versailles and badge engineering, Lincoln stylists took great care to differentiate the expensive Continental from the Ford Thunderbird and Mercury Cougar XR7 sharing a common chassis with it; unlike the Versailles, no visible body panels were shared.
Shifting from the Ford Panther platform to the Ford Fox platform, the Lincoln Continental became a mid-size car for the first time.
Although it would be the shortest-wheelbase Lincoln ever (at the time), the Continental would use a stretched 108.5" wheelbase version of the Fox platform used by the Ford Thunderbird and Mercury Cougar.
The 1982 Lincoln Continental was fitted with two different engines.
For the first time on a Lincoln-badged Continental, its namesake "Continental spare tire trunk" seen on the Mark Series was used as a decklid design feature.
Coinciding with the introduction of the two-door Continental Mark VII, the Lincoln Continental was given a styling update for the 1984 model year.
For 1982, the Continental was offered in base trim, Signature Series, and Givenchy Designer Series trim.
The Continental name was revived in late 1955 as a separate marque, produced by a separate Continental Division of the Ford Motor Company,[REF] with its sole model being the Continental Mark II.
Continentals for 1956 were among the most expensive cars in the world [REF] - with a retail price of just under $10,000[REF] (equivalent to nearly $90,000 in 2016) at a time when a Ford Customline could be purchased for less than $2000,[REF] it rivaled Rolls-Royce.
The Continental Mark II was sold for just two model years.
Total production equaled 2,996 including two prototype convertibles [REF].
With the impending adoption of federal fuel-economy standards (CAFE) making the large cars of the 1970s a potential financial threat to Ford Motor Company, the full-size cars of all of its divisions underwent extensive downsizing for the 1979 model year.
The downsizing undergone by the 1980 Lincoln and Mark provided Lincoln with the best year-to-year fuel economy improvement (38%) in Ford history [REF].
One of the most touted options the 1980 Continental offered was the new digital instrument cluster, which used vacuum fluorescent displays for the vehicle speedometer, odometer, fuel gauge, and temperature gauge.
This version of the Continental would last only for a single model year.
Central to the redesign was the adoption of the all-new the Ford Panther platform, shared with the Ford LTD and Mercury Marquis.
In its focus on fuel economy, the Panther platform was developed without the use of the 400 or 460 V8s powering full-size Lincoln-Mercurys throughout the 1970s.
The new Panther platform allowed for changes in the new Continental's suspension geometry and many improvements were made to the power steering.
Although sharing a common platform and powertrain with the Ford LTD and Mercury Marquis, the Lincoln Continental was well differentiated from its counterparts; no visible body panels were common between the three vehicles.
In contrast, the 1980 Continental was positioned as the base model of the Lincoln model line; the Continental Town Car/Town Coupe made its return as the top-trim model.
For the 1970 model year, the Lincoln Continental was redesigned for the first time since 1961.
Vacuum-operated hidden headlamps were added, which retracted upwards in event of failure.
As with the 1969 Continental and Mark III, the 1970 Continental was powered by the newly introduced 365 hp 460 cubic-inch V8; all versions received a 3-speed automatic transmission.
For 1970, Lincoln offered the Continental in a two-door hardtop coupe, and a four-door "pillared hardtop" sedan.
In 1972, the long-standing tradition of Lincoln-division engines came to an end as the 460 V8 became available to Mercury in versions of the Mercury Marquis and Colony Park.,[REF]
For 1973, federal crash regulations mandated the fitment of 5-mph bumpers to the front of all vehicles for sale in the United States.
For 1974, in a move that would begin to break away from the styling of the 1960s slab-sided Continentals, both front and rear bumpers were replaced by wraparound 5-mph bumpers.
For its sixth year on the market, the Lincoln Continental was given an extensive upgrade for the 1975 model year.
Although Ford was unable to commit to a complete redesign, the 1975 Lincoln Continental saw a major restyling.
For 1976, the exterior remained the same.
For 1978, in move intended to cut weight and cost and also to refresh the interior, the steel-frame dashboard used since 1970 is replaced with the plastic one sourced from the Mercury Marquis.
For 1979, the Lincoln Continental remained in production as the final "large" American car as the Ford LTD and Mercury Marquis underwent downsizing.
To commemorate the 50th anniversary of Lincoln in 1971, a Golden Anniversary Town Car was offered as a limited-edition option for Continental buyers.
From 1977 to 1979, a Williamsburg Edition was available for the Continental Town Car.
To commemorate the final year of the fifth-generation Lincolns, which were the last "large" American sedans, Lincoln offered a Collector's Series as an option package for the Continental.
1970 - model range includes Continental, Continental Coupe, and, as per 1969, the Town Car option (4-door only).
1971 - Lincoln continues with high compression engines, one model year longer than GM.
1972 - Lincoln drops the compression ratio to allow the use of regular gasoline and to lower pollution emissions.
1973 - As per 1972 but with a Town Coupe introduced.
1974 - An intermediate styling year, segueing between the 1970-1973 and the 1975-1979, with a one-year only rear taillight design.
1975 - A substantial styling makeover, particularly to the roof line but also the rear.
1976 - Essentially identical to 1975 but for a number of previously standard comfort and convenience items made optional.
1977 - The body remains almost identical to 1975-1976 but for the grille and related front clip/hood changes.
1978 - The dashboard is changed completely, dispensing with the steel-framed 1970-1977 design and adopting the 1973-1978 Mercury design, which has a plastic substructure.
The Lincoln Continental began life as a personal vehicle for Ford Motor Company President Edsel Ford [REF].
At the time work had begun on the first Continental coupe, Lincoln had previously cancelled the Lincoln K-series coupes, sedans, and limousines, and produced the very limited Lincoln Custom limousine, along with the smaller Lincoln-Zephyr coupes and sedans.
By design, the Edsel Ford prototype could be considered a channelled and sectioned Lincoln-Zephyr convertible; although the vehicle wore a conventional windshield profile, the prototype sat nearly 7 inches lower than a standard Lincoln.
The design would introduce two long-running features used in many American automobile designs.
The prototype designed by Gregorie was produced on time, making the deadline to be delivered to Edsel Ford in Florida.
Immediately, production commenced on the Lincoln Continental, with the majority of production being "Cabriolet" convertibles and a rare number of coupes.
Cho competed in what would be the final edition of the Hayago Championship.
In the middle of 2002, Cho started in the 9th Agon Cup.
In this match, Cho was ahead and was determined not to let anything stop him from beating O Meien.
2003 was the year of the Samsung Cup.
In 2003, Cho competed in the JAL Super Hayago Championship.
In 2004, Cho competed in the JAL Super Hayago Championship again.
Cho found himself in the Judan once more, this time 14 years after his last bid as challenger in 1991 against Masaki Takemiya (Cho lost 3-2).
Cho has his own dojo where he teaches Go.
Cho's dojo is known for having a strict schedule.
The dojo has a league also.
Cho has also had some good students.
Cho defended the Honinbo title once more, which would lead to him defending it again and again until 1999.
Cho made another miraculous comeback, this time in 1992 against his biggest rival Kobayashi Koichi in the Honinbo.
1993 was the fifth year in a row Cho would hold the Honinbo.
He lost his most prized title, the Meijin, to Norimoto Yoda in 2000.
Cho competed in 34th edition of the Hayago Championship in 2002.
Cho starts off the year by winning his first three games.
As of September 1, Cho's record for the year is 24-12 [REF].
Cho won the first game of his second consecutive Judan defense against Keigo Yamashita by resignation.
Cho won the 5th Shin-Ei after beating Yasumasa Hane, who was an 8 dan at the time.
His most significant accomplishment of 1974 was qualifying for the 22nd Nihon Ki-in Championship, especially since this came after being beaten out of the Honinbo preliminaries by Takaho Kojima.
His career skyrocketed when Kido magazine named him the Number One Young Player.
1976 was a year of change, especially for Cho.
1977 was a bad year for Cho.
Cho looked much better in 1978.
1979 was a year of change for Cho.
Cho lost his Gosei title in 1987 to friend Masao Kato.
1988 was showing small signs of an old Cho, adding inconsistency.
Cho ended the year with two titles just like last.
In another unspectacular year, Cho lost the Judan to Takemiya but defended the Honinbo.
Cho was born into a very rich family of six children.
His grandfather taught him Go when he was young.
Cho enrolled at the Nihon Ki-in as an insei when he was only seven.
Cho won the Honinbo for the first time in 1981.
Along with his Meijin and Honinbo, he added another title to his collection-the Judan title.
Being up 3-0 in the Kisei final, it looked like Fujisawa Shuko would run away with the title - for a seventh time in a row.
Cho won the 8th Kisei title, defending it against Rin Kaiho.
The Kisei title was defended by Cho in 1985.
Reached career win 1000 in 1999, win 1200 in 2005, and win 1300 in 2008 [REF].
Nine time winner of KIDO magazine's "Most Outstanding Player" [REF].
Nine time winner of the Hidetoshi Prize [REF].
Four time winner of the Shusai award [REF].
Journalist Club Prize winner in 1986 [REF].
Honorable citizen of Chiba City award winner in 1996 [REF].
The new breed of electronic astronomers that Paul Wild joined were applying their wartime skills to radiophysics research, the Radiophysics Laboratory having achieved a number of successes since it was established, early in the war, to bring radar to Australia.
When Wild joined the solar group there were two teams from which to choose.
The spectrograph - the first ever built - looked at the spectrum of bursts of radiations from the Sun over a wide spectral range for frequencies from 40 to 70 megahertz.
Wild's team now needed a site for a new, better engineered and more powerful radiospectrograph and a large swept-frequency interferometer with which to observe the radio source.
This work was done in primitive buildings and facilities.
The bursts were distinguished by the way the frequency drifted with time.
Wild's team associated type III bursts with streams of electrons being ejected at a third the speed of light and taking less than half an hour to reach the Earth.
The mechanisms proved to be correct and their naming of the phenomena became the international standard.
In the course of this solar work, Wild became interested in the radio spectrum of hydrogen and wrote up an internal report related to the potential for spectral lines in the solar bursts.
Edgeworth David Medal, Royal Society of New South Wales (1957) [REF].
Fellow, Australian Academy of Science (1964) [REF].
Inaugural Arctowski Medal, United States National Academy of Sciences (1969) [REF].
Balthasar van der Pol Gold Medal, International Union of Radio Science (1969) [REF].
Fellow, Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering 1977 [REF].
Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) (1978) [REF].
Royal Archive winner, The Royal Society (1980) [REF].
George Ellery Hale Prize for Solar Astronomy, American Astronomical Society (1980) [REF].
ANZAAS Medal, Australian and New Zealand Association for the Advancement of Science (1984) [REF].
Companion of the Order of Australia (AC) (1986) [REF].
Hartnett Medal, Royal Society of Arts London (1988) [REF].
Paul Wild became one of the young radar officers who ensured the Royal Navy used its new technology to maximum effect.
The Royal Navy was innovative in the way it incorporated information from the ship's new radar into its gunnery, with a direct line of communication from the radar officer to the bridge.
Despite the Royal Navy's innovation in its use of radar, an underlying aversion to new technology persisted among some senior naval officers.
On returning to England, Wild taught radar to permanent naval officers until early 1947.
In looking for applied research opportunities, Wild discovered that the Australian Department of Civil Aviation had been considering a call by the International Civil Aviation Organization for member states to propose a new system to replace the longstanding Instrument Landing System.
Interscan[REF] proved to have many advantages over other precision landing systems.
In 1978, Interscan was accepted as the new global standard in microwave landing systems - but only after many international political hurdles had been overcome.
Although Interscan did not sweep the aviation world as had been expected, it nevertheless provided a springboard for many engineers' careers, and made a considerable contribution to development of Australian science and technology.
In 1991 Wild's wife of 43 years, Elaine, died.
The two also worked together on a paper in gravitational theory, 'Evaluation of the Cosmic Density Parameter, Omega', concerning the component of omega due to mass.
Paul Wild was a knowledgeable classical music lover, enjoying Beethoven in particular; an expert at The Times crossword puzzles, chess and bridge; a railway enthusiast; a social cricketer and a "walking encyclopaedia of cricket knowledge" [REF].
Wild's humour also came through in the occasional light-hearted impersonation.
Wild engendered intense loyalties among the people he knew.
Paul Wild died of natural causes in Canberra on 10 May 2008.
John Paul Wild was born in Sheffield, [England] on 17 May 1923, the fourth son of wealthy cutlery manufacturer, Alwyn Wild, and his wife Bessie.
His childhood was a happy one, with his "imperialistic grandfather" having a strong influence in his upbringing [REF].
The driving intellectual curiosity that was to distinguish Paul Wild was evident from an early age.
Wild developed a strong love of mathematics from a very early age.
Whitgift School is near what was then Croydon Aerodrome.
In 1978, Wild became Chairman of CSIRO, a position he held until 1985, and for part of that tenure was also its Chief Executive.
This role, especially, invoked a sense of duty that had its roots during and before Wild's naval service.
Wild recognised that CSIRO needed to adapt and provide scientific and technological leadership in a changing world, reflecting his maxim that "without excellence and originality, research achieves nothing."
The diplomacy and political strategy that Wild had first used to major advantage in negotiations with the International Civil Aviation Organization, combined with his intellectual rigour and a deeply ingrained focus on doing what was right, served CSIRO and Australia well until he retired from CSIRO, aged 62, in 1985.
Trip on a very slow train .
In 1983, Paul Wild conceived the idea of high-speed railway system to link Sydney, Canberra and Melbourne.
The State Rail Authority was offering a "new rail travel experience" in a powerful and comfortable new express passenger train, the XPT, on services radiating from Sydney.
Wild was looking forward to a fast ride on his first country train journey in many years.
Wild experienced "a feeling of deep gloom," but he knew the concept was too good to give up.
In April 1984, he and several CSIRO senior staff members, and a senior engineering manager from BHP, met to discuss a concept paper.
From Sydney to Canberra much of the route[REF] was similar to that of the Hume Highway.
Wild's science minister, Barry Jones, enclosed a copy in a letter to the Prime Minister, observing that the concept would be very valuable in assisting decentralisation.
First opposition from government .
The proposal's reception in the federal transport portfolio was in marked contrast.
In the federal parliament, Morris topped off his officials' scepticism with his own brand of spleen, perhaps tinted by his long union experience in the transport industry.
He was to say later, "I got myself in some trouble saying that this knock-back was characteristic of the malaise which the country is suffering, which got into a headline.
Wild retired from CSIRO in October 1985, but CSIRO continued to support pre-feasibility studies until October 1988.
In June 1987 the joint venture's pre-feasibility study was completed.
In July-August 1988 a $1 million passenger market analysis was completed and a feasibility study was started, for which the joint venture partners budgeted $19 million.
The VFT project attracted widespread public and media interest.
Overall public support for the project was very strong.
In July 1990 the VFT joint venture announced comparative studies of market demand and capital costs on the coastal and the inland routes.
The decision earned the scorn of the original corporate supporter of the proposal, Sir Peter Abeles, a visionary who from the start had been attracted to the VFT's national development potential.
The project faced other problems.
Externally, there was the continuing issue of dealing with four governments, i.e. the federal government; the state governments of New South Wales and Victoria; and following the recent granting of self-government to the national capital, the Australian Capital Territory government.
Wild retained a sense of bitterness about the federal government's short-sightedness that thwarted the project.
In August 1991 the federal government gave its final, negative answer and the joint venture ceased work on the project.
Other countries forge ahead .
The man who at the age of seven wanted to be an engine driver did not see his childhood dream realised in his adopted country.
Wild's team then built and from 1967 operated a three-kilometre diameter radio-heliograph at Culgoora, near Narrabri in northern New South Wales.
Until then, all results from the solar radio-spectrographs had been inferred from studying the Sun by looking at its spectrum with only very limited angular resolution.
With Pawsey's help, £630,000 was raised from the Ford Foundation to build the Culgoora radio-heliograph.
Although Wild wrote most of the papers, he was characteristically generous in giving credit to others, saying "I did put other people's names on them because they'd made important contributions".
The Culgoora site later became the home for the Paul Wild Observatory,[REF] opened in 1988 and now a site for several major astronomical facilities.
Wild was always keen to pass on his enthusiasm for science.
The city has an area of 328.48 square kilometres, which includes the former cities of Fort William and Port Arthur, as well as the [former] townships of Neebing and McIntyre.
The former Port Arthur section is more typical of the Canadian Shield, with gently sloping hills and very thin soil lying on top of bedrock with many bare outcrops.
The Thunder Bay area experiences a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification Dfb)[REF] that is influenced by Lake Superior, with especially noticeable effects in the city's north end.
The city is quite sunny, with an average of 2121 hours of bright sunshine each year, ranging from 268.1 hours in July to 86.2 hours in November, sunnier than any city in Canada located to the east of it [REF].
According to the 2006 Census, there were 109,140 people residing in Thunder Bay on 16 May 2006, of whom 48.4% were male and 51.6% were female.
Between the censuses of 2001 and 2006, Thunder Bay's population increased by 0.1%, compared to the average of 6.6% for Ontario and 5.4% for Canada.
A further 13,767 people lived in Thunder Bay's Census Metropolitan Area, which apart from Thunder Bay includes the municipalities of Neebing and Oliver Paipoonge, the townships of Conmee, Gillies, O'Connor and Shuniah, and the aboriginal community of Fort William First Nation [REF].
Ethnicity According to the census, Thunder Bay was home to 14,510 people of Finnish descent,[REF] the highest concentration of people of Finnish origin per capita in Canada, and the second largest Finnish population in Canada after that of Toronto (14,750).
Language In terms of Canada's official languages, 81.6% of Thunder Bayers spoke only English, and 2.6% spoke only French.
As the largest city in Northwestern Ontario, Thunder Bay is the region's commercial, administrative and medical centre.
Bombardier Transportation operates a 553000sqft plant in Thunder Bay which manufactures mass transit vehicles and equipment, employing approximately 800 people [REF].
Lack of innovation by traditional industries, such as forest products, combined with high labour costs have reduced the industrial base of Thunder Bay by close to 60%.
In an effort to rejuvenate its economy, the city has been actively working to attract quaternary or "knowledge-based" industries, primarily in the fields of molecular medicine and genomics [REF].
Thunder Bay's proximity to the wilderness of the Boreal Forest and the rolling hills and mountains of the Canadian Shield allow its residents to enjoy very active lifestyles.
Thunder Bay enjoys many recreational facilities.
Municipal ice rinks and indoor pools .
Thunder Bay is also home to the National Development Centre - Thunder Bay, an elite cross-country ski team that attracts many of Canada's best Junior and U-23 skiers.
Thunder Bay 10 Mile Road Race .
The city is governed by a mayor and twelve councillors.
Thunder Bay is represented in the Canadian Parliament by Don Rusnak, and Patty Hajdu, both members of the Liberal Party of Canada, and in the Ontario Legislature by Ontario Liberal Party members Michael Gravelle and Bill Mauro.
Sleeping Giant A large formation of mesas on the Sibley Peninsula in Lake Superior which resembles a reclining giant has become a symbol of the city.
Coat of arms The Coat of arms of Thunder Bay, Ontario is a combination of the coats of arms of both Port Arthur and Fort William, with a unifying symbol-the Sleeping Giant-at the base of the arms [REF].
Corporate logo The city logo depicts a stylized thunderbird, called Animikii, a statue of which is located on the city's Kaministiquia River Heritage Park.
City flag Thunder Bay's flag was created in 1972, when mayor Saul Laskin wanted to promote the city by having a distinctive flag.
Thunder Bay has four sister cities on three continents,[REF] which are selected based on economic, cultural and political criteria.
Thunder Bay receives air, rail and shipping traffic due to its prime location along major continental transportation routes.
The city is an important railway hub, served by both the Canadian National and Canadian Pacific Railway.
Thunder Bay has been a port since the days of the North West Company which maintained a schooner on Lake Superior.
Thunder Bay has one major hospital, the Thunder Bay Regional Health Sciences Centre.
Thunder Bay has one daily newspaper, The Chronicle-Journal, which has a circulation of approximately 28,000 and has coverage of all of Northwestern Ontario [REF].
Three English-language stations supply Thunder Bay with free digital over-the-air television.
The cable provider in Thunder Bay is Shaw, although locally owned TBayTel, has been granted a license by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) to compete in the cable TV market [REF].
WBKP TV channel 5, the CW affiliate in Calumet, Michigan can be received in Thunder Bay with an outdoor roof antenna and a digital-capable television or receiver.
Thunder Bay is home to 12 radio stations, all of which broadcast on the FM band.
There are four commercial radio stations based in the city - Rock 94 and 91.5 CKPR, owned by Dougall Media, the parent company of Thunder Bay Television and Thunder Bay's Source, and Magic 99.9 and Country 105, owned by Acadia Broadcasting.
European settlement at Thunder Bay began with two French fur trading posts (1683, 1717) which were subsequently abandoned (see Fort William, Ontario).
By the 1850s, the Province of Canada began to take an interest in its western extremity.
Another settlement developed a few miles to the north of Fort William after construction by the federal Department of Public Works of a road connecting Lake Superior with the Red River Colony.
The arrival of the CPR in 1875 sparked a long rivalry between the towns, which did not end until the amalgamation of 1970.
In the era of Sir Wilfrid Laurier, Thunder Bay began a period of extraordinary growth, based on improved access to markets via the transcontinental railway and development of the western wheat boom.
By 1914, the twin cities had modern infrastructures (sewers, safe water supply, street lighting, electric light, etc.)
The boom came to an end in 1913-14, aggravated by the outbreak of the First World War.
Railway employment was hurt when the federal government took over the National Transcontinental Railway and Lake Superior Division from the Grand Trunk in 1915, and the Canadian Northern Railway in 1918.
The forest products industry has played an important role in the Thunder Bay economy, from the 1870s.
Manufacturing resumed in 1937 when the Canada Car and Foundry Company plant (opened during late World War I to produce naval ships and railcars) re-opened to build aircraft for the British.
On 1 January 1970, the City of Thunder Bay was formed through the merger of the cities of Fort William, Port Arthur, and the geographic townships of Neebing and McIntyre [REF].
There was more controversy over the selection of a name for the amalgamated city than over whether to amalgamate.
The expansion of highways, beginning with the Trans-Canada Highway, and culminating with the opening of Highway 17 (linking Sault Ste Marie to Thunder Bay in 1960), has significantly diminished railway and shipping activity since the 1970s and 80s.
Thunder Bay has become the regional services centre for Northwestern Ontario with most provincial departments represented.
The city of Thunder Bay was declared a "Cultural Capital of Canada" in 2003 [REF].
Thunder Bay is home to a variety of music and performance arts venues.
The Bay Street Film Festival, established in 2005, is an independent film festival that features local, national, and international films with the theme of "Films for the People."
The Thunder Bay Art Gallery, which was founded in 1976, specializes in the works of First Nations artists, having a collection of national significance.
Thunder Bay has many places of worship supported by people of a variety of faiths, reflecting the cultural diversity of the population [REF].
Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary Church - Ukrainian Orthodox.
Calvary Lutheran Church was established in 1958 as a mission congregation of the Minnesota North District (USA).
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church).
Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Church.
Redwood Park Church Contemporary member of the Christian Missionary Alliance.
Shaarey Shomayim Congregation - Jewish Synagogue.
Shepherd of Israel Congregation - Messianic Jewish.
St Stephen the Martyr Anglican Church.
St. John the Evangelist Anglican Church.
St. Patrick's Cathedral - Roman Catholic.
CNBC has operated international versions of the channel since 1995, when CNBC Asia originally launched.
Besides CNBC Europe and CNBC Asia, the network also operates a number of local business news channels in association with other companies.
CNBC Europe and CNBC Asia are rebranded in some parts of the world with tickers containing local financial information.
In North America, CNBC World airs business programming from CNBC Europe and CNBC Asia, as well as weekly magazine programs provided by CNBC-TV18 and the United Nations.
In Central America and the Caribbean, CNBC Latin America retransmits live programs from CNBC and CNBC World.
In Canada, CNBC can be seen with most of the programming identical to the U.S. counterpart.
CNBC's most recent international spinoff is CNBC Africa.
The launch of the Korean language channel SBS-CNBC in January 2010 marked the fifteenth CNBC-branded channel worldwide [REF].
In January 10, 2016, CNBC and Trans Media announced a strategic partnership that will see the creation of the Indonesian language channel CNBC Indonesia [REF].
CNBC.com is the companion website to the financial network.
In August 2001, CNBC.com merged with MSN's Moneycentral.com,
During this period, the editorial content on the CNBC.com
CNBC.com was relaunched on December 4, 2006.
Content on the new website is edited 24 hours a day during the business week.
In August 2012, CNBC.com attracted 6.9 million unique visitors, according to comScore Media Metrix.
On December 14, 2010, CNBC and CarryQuote announced a development and marketing collaboration that resulted in the release of CNBC PRO, a mobile and desktop financial application for individual investors [REF].
CNBC Pro provides its subscribers with real-time financial data from more than 100 stock exchanges worldwide, plus CNBC news and streaming video [REF].
CNBC provides a variety of programs throughout the business day.
On September 17, 2007, the network has also run hourly CNBC.com
CNBC's breakout hit among its original series is Mad Money.
On January 24, 2007, the network launched a long-anticipated monthly newsmagazine called Business Nation, which is anchored by award-winning journalist David Faber.
Other special or weekend programming includes CNBC on Assignment (for example, The Age of Wal-Mart), Cover to Cover, The Suze Orman Show and On the Money.
In May 2010, CNBC announced that it would be adding business and financial-themed movies to its Friday night lineup under the name "CNBC Cinema."[REF] .
In the fall of 2011, CNBC began to brand its primetime lineup under the title CNBC Smart.
On March 5, 2013, CNBC rebranded its primetime lineup once again as CNBC Prime, a move first announced on January 7 of the same year [REF].
In 2016, CNBC announced two new reality series including Cleveland Hustles and a spin-off of The Profit titled The Partner [REF].
CNBC has experimented with non-business programming during primetime hours with a mixed record of success, including a talk show hosted by Dennis Miller.
CNBC has occasionally served as an overflow outlet for NBC Sports programming; beginning in 2000, CNBC has carried portions of NBC's coverage of the Olympic Games outside of business day hours.
Since the 2011-12 season, CNBC has shown coverage of the National Hockey League's Stanley Cup Playoffs, produced as part of the NHL on NBC package [REF].
Until 2017, CNBC also participated in USA Network's coverage of the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show [REF].
Since December 1997, the network has held a strategic alliance with the publishing and financial information firm Dow Jones & Company [REF].
CNBC has also held a content deal with The New York Times since January 2008, which has widely been seen as an attempt by both parties to take on increased competition from News Corporation [REF].
The network's live market prices, economic data and other statistics are largely provided by Thomson Reuters (Reuters and Thomson Financial prior to their 2008 merger) [REF].
The channel also maintains the "CNBC Investor Network", a series of webcam connections to the trading rooms of various independent financial institutions across the United States.
On December 14, 2010, CNBC and CarryQuote announced a development and marketing collaboration that resulted in the release of CNBC PRO, a mobile and desktop financial application for individual investors [REF].
CNBC has been criticized for allegedly amplifying bull and bear markets, particularly in the run-up to the Dot-com bubble and the subprime crisis [REF].
Jon Stewart on Comedy Central's The Daily Show has been a vocal critic of CNBC and some of its personalities, beginning after comments were made by Rick Santelli [REF].
CNBC was accused by the Obama administration of "cable chatter"-the excessive and sometimes brutal discussion on a particular topic, often one-sided [REF].
Jim Cramer's stock picks on his CNBC show Mad Money were found by Barron's magazine in 2007 to have underperformed the S&P 500 stock index over the previous two years.
CNBC was criticized for restricting public access to the third Republican Presidential Debate aired on October 28, 2015, by refusing to temporarily suspend their TV Everywhere authentication system to allow all viewers to stream the event [REF].
CNBC had its beginnings around 1980 as the Satellite Program Network (SPN), showing a low-budget mix of old movies, instructional and entertainment programs.
CNBC had considerable difficulty getting cable carriage at first, as many providers were skeptical of placing it alongside the longer-established Financial News Network.
However, around this time, FNN encountered serious financial difficulties.
Under Rogers' leadership, CNBC began to grow during the 1990s, launching Asian and European versions of the channel in 1995 and 1996 respectively [REF].
NBC Universal reacquired full control of loss-making CNBC Europe and CNBC Asia from Dow Jones at the end of 2005.
Today, CNBC provides business news programming from 4 a.m. to 7 p.m., Eastern Time, while broadcasting talk shows, investigative reports, documentaries, infomercials, and other programs during the evening and early morning.
The music used from October 2003 to December 2005 was produced by 615 Music of Nashville, Tennessee.
CNBC's main voice-over announcer during business-day programming is Jim Birdsall, who also works for NFL Films, and was the narrator in the commercials for pizza chain CiCi's Pizza [REF].
The graphics are designed by Sweden-based Magoo 3D studios [REF].
CNBC HD (formerly CNBC HD+) is a 1080i high-definition enhanced simulcast of CNBC, that was launched on October 10, 2007.
On May 30, 2012, the right sidebar graphic was changed to show headlines (business news and otherwise), upcoming corporate earnings releases, upcoming economy data, easier-to-read charts, market stats and what's coming up on the program that is being aired.
DirecTV was the first provider to introduce CNBC HD, with various others eventually taking suit (all of the providers have the HD feed as of the Oct. 13, 2014 redesign) [REF].
There is a fairly clear long-term correlation between the performance of global stock markets and the audience ratings of CNBC.
During the late 1990s and early 2000s, CNBC's ratings were increasing sharply along with the stock market, often beating those of CNN during market hours [REF].
The network often sees large spikes in viewership on days of major market moves.
While daytime viewership has rebounded from its 2005 lows, primetime ratings remain weak relative to those of other news networks[REF] and CNBC continues to try and rejuvenate its evening lineup.
When discussing the network's ratings, CNBC management and press releases regularly suggest that considerable viewership, particularly during the daytime, is done "out of home" in places such as offices and hotel rooms [REF].
On January 6, 2015, the Wall Street Journal reported that CNBC would be partnering with Cogent Research to calculate the viewership of its business day programming by surveying financial advisers and investors.
The second-generation Corona Mark II was based on a new X series platform abandoning the compact Corona T series chassis.
The styling used on the second generation was dramatically different from the first, showing similarities to the S60 series Crown.
It was originally only available with the smallest 1.7-litre inline-four.
In August 1973, there were minor changes and updates.
North America The Crown line of cars was no longer marketed in North America due to poor sales.
North American market cars had the 2.3-litre M-series "six" when they first went on sale in early 1972, but in August of that year this was replaced by the larger 2.6-litre 4M unit.
First released in October 1992, the Mark II was revised during the period.
The X90 series was available in six different trim levels.
The next four trim levels featured only petrol straight sixes for engines and either rear- or all-wheel drive.
The hardtop approach was used on various segments of core Toyota sedans by offering a more upscale hardtop version.
The Corona Mark II, first offered for sale in Japan, September 1968, at Toyopet Store dealerships, was intended as an intermediate model between the large luxury sedan the Crown, sold at Toyota Store dealerships, and the smaller Corona, also available at Toyopet Stores.
The four-door sedan was designated the T60, and the two-door coupé the T70.
The US exported versions arrived for the 1969 model year and often include the more powerful R series motors compared to other regions.
The RT62 sedans and the RT72 coupé feature the 1.9-litre 8R four-cylinder engine, unique to the Mark II.
The Corona Mark II is longer, at over the Corona's length of for the sedan, and the coupe, with a width of in comparison to for the sedan and coupe.
First released in August 1988, the Mark II was no longer the top level sedan at Toyopet Store locations in Japan with the introduction of the Toyota Celsior 9 October 1989.
After 1992, the X80 series continued to be produced for taxi fleet vehicles until 1995, when the Crown Comfort assumed taxi duties.
Toyota introduced the slightly larger fourth generation of the Cressida, the MX83, in 1988 for the 1989 model year - the final generation for the Cressida in North America.
Standard features included a new, more powerful 3.0-litre straight six 7M-GE engine producing at 6,000 rpm and 185 lb-ft (250 Nm) at 4,400 rpm.
The Cressida was praised for its comfortable and quiet ride, graceful rear-wheel-drive handling, high gas mileage for its class (23 mpg [US] average according to a July 1989 Consumer Reports test), and stellar reliability.
The most substantive change was the 1990 facelift for model year 1991, which brought brighter alloy wheels, a redesigned grille containing the new Toyota "T" logo, and simplified climate controls.
In the Middle East, the Cressida had a 2.4-litre 22R engine producing at 6,000 rpm.
In Australia, the Cressida was sold from April 1977 to February 1993, when it was replaced by the Vienta (and later the Avalon in the full-size bracket).
The Cressida also played a part in the design of the first Lexus models, most closely resembling the LS 400.
The introduction of the Toyota Avalon in the American market in 1995 filled the gap left by the cancellation of the Toyota Cressida in 1992.
Like its predecessor, the X100-series Toyota Mark II was available in multiple trim levels.
The base GL came with only the 2.4-litre 2L-TE turbo-diesel straight-four mated to a four-speed automatic.
The Grande trim levels had a plethora of options and features available not limited to but including tilt-steering, standard ABS, traction control and AWD.
The Tourer trim level carried on from the X90 series in both Tourer S and Tourer V.
So as to continue to offer Mark II customers the option of purchasing a station wagon at Toyopet Store locations, Toyota introduced the Toyota Mark II Qualis which was identical to the Camry-based station wagon called the Camry Gracia.
The first series, called the Toyota Corona Mark II was an all new vehicle at its introduction in 1968, that sought to offer a car that was just under Japanese government regulations concerning maximum vehicle dimensions and engine displacement, thus allowing the Crown to grow larger and more luxurious.
At the Mark II's introduction in the late 1960s, Toyota was known as a small, economy car manufacturer.
As the Mark II began to become popular with drivers around the world, Toyota introduced variations of the Mark II with two different model names, both sedans but with different styling and marketing approaches.
The fourth-generation Corona Mark II was launched in 1980.
The Van generally received less powerful engines and has very sparse equipment, and was shorter than its passenger car equivalent due to the use of more compact bumpers [REF].
The X60 Mark II introduced the world's first voice warning system developed and offered as standard [REF].
The second-generation Cressida, the MX63, was a significant redesign from the previous generation.
This model was again assembled in New Zealand initially only with a two-litre, four-cylinder petrol engine and five-speed manual or optional three-speed automatic transmission.
In 1983, the Cressida was refreshed and gained an independent semi-trailing link rear suspension, rear vented disc brakes, and the 5M-GE engine.
In August 1983, Toyota chairman Eiji Toyoda initiated the F1 project ("Flagship" and "No. 1 vehicle"; alternatively called the "Circle-F" project), a clandestine effort aimed at producing a world-class luxury sedan for international markets [REF].
US federal law for seatbelt and safety regulations saw the introduction of automatic seat belts which consisted of a motorized shoulder belt that was deployed in the closed position when the door was closed and the ignition on.
After the mid-generation facelift, a mid-grade specification similar to the original one-model line was offered on New Zealand assembled models with the four-cylinder engine; a new top version had a two-litre six-cylinder engine, four-speed automatic and air conditioning, becoming the first NZ-built Toyota to have 'air' as standard.
Production swapped to the X51 and X61 Chaser in 1980, with the addition of the 6-cylinder 2.0 L 1G-EU (single cam) and 1G-GE (twincam) engines.
The 1984 model dropped the Corona name in Japan and simply called it the Mark II.
There are two different variations of the Mark II
Exterior changes on the Hardtop version includes a slanted nose which requires a new grille, a thinner headlamp assembly that match the slanted nose, frameless door windows, thinner tail lamp, front fenders and bumper.
The Standard version is exactly like the MX-73 Toyota Cressida.
The X70 station wagon was produced from 1984 to 1997 with only a few minor revisions over the years.
In 1984 for the 1985 model year, a new Cressida was introduced by Toyota.
The automatic transmission retained its Normal/Power selector as many other Toyotas would, but later in production, the Economy selection was dropped.
This series first appeared in August 1984.
Minor change in August 1986.
The third generation was introduced with a more upscale, European type design.
Some models had six-cylinder engines, optionally with electronic fuel injection, borrowed from the larger Crown.
In 1998, Toyota released a car called Progrès.
The Toyota Chaser was released in 1977 as a competitor to the Nissan Skyline sedan.
The Chaser chassis codes were X30, X31, X40 and X41 as both a two- and four-door sedan, with no station wagons or commercial delivery vehicles offered, unlike the Mark II.
The Corona Mark II was renamed the Toyota Cressida for export markets, and the name Cressida was not used in Japan.
The name "Cressida" derives from the lead character in William Shakespeare's play Troilus and Cressida, inspired by Cressida, a female Trojan character.
Depending on the market it was sold in, it had the 4M carbureted engine (MX32, MX36), the 18R engine (RX30, RX32, RX35) or 3T engine (TX30).
Standard features included air conditioning, automatic transmission (a 5-speed manual was available), power steering, rear seat armrests, AM/FM cassette stereo with amplifier, reclining front seats, and a rear window defroster.
In the United Kingdom, the Cressida was available in both sedan and wagon body styles.
South African Cressidas all received the 2.0-litre 18R engine, and were introduced in November 1977 [REF].
This last generation of Mark II hosted several new technologies for Toyota.
The X110 series discontinued the hardtop version in favor of the standard version.
During this time, Toyota has discontinued the Chaser and Cresta nameplate and created the Verossa.
Minor changes was made in 2002.
The Mark II Blit was the wagon version of the X110 Mark II.
The Mark II Blit was exclusive to Toyota Japanese dealership Toyopet Store continuing to offer the Mark II in a station wagon.
The Streibs are a mysterious race that don't engage in diplomatic contacts with other races, but rather treat them as laboratory animals and conduct cruel experiments upon them.
Few things are known about the Streibs except that they launch raids on other worlds and sectors, capture isolated life-forms from their ships, and quickly retreat before they can be pursued.
It is unclear whether these captures are scientific experiments, intelligence gathering for an invasion, or just a cruel way for the Streibs to entertain themselves.
The Streibs once invaded Minbari territory, but it proved a terrible mistake, as the superior Minbari fleet pursued them all the way to their homeworld and "made sure they understood the depth of their mistake" (in the words of Delenn).
The Streibs also captured Babylon 5 commander John Sheridan, but this too was a fatal mistake as the EAS Agamemnon, with the help of Delenn and Ivanova, completely destroyed the sampler ship and rescued Sheridan [REF].
The Streibs look (and behave) a bit like the Greys of UFO folklore, although in the Babylon 5 universe, what we call Greys are in fact the Vrees.
The Thirdspace aliens are large, octopus-like creatures.
Over a million years ago, the Vorlons built a jump gate to open a doorway to what they believed was the source of life.
Straczynski later confided during an interview that the Thirdspace aliens were inspired by Lovecraft's Great Old Ones, in that they are a malevolent force existing in a dimension or trans-spatial realm just adjacent to our own and that they use other species to increase their power and as servants.
The Drazi race in the show was depicted as reptilian in appearance, with blue skin, thick skull bones, and no nostrils, although they are otherwise humanoid.
Drazi have a pouch in one of their armpits
The ancient Drazi used to live outdoors, only sleeping inside at night.
Every five Earth years, the Drazi have a "civil war" between two rival factions, green Drazi and purple Drazi.
The Drazi participated heavily during the Shadow war in 2260, and its later escalation with the full of entrance of the Vorlons by early 2261.
The only known major warship seen on-screen operated by the Drazi is the "Sunhawk", a small, highly maneuverable cruiser possibly designed primarily for patrols and quick hit-and-run attacks on larger targets.
The Sky Serpent is heavily armored and can sustain multiple hits from enemy fire [REF].
In the "Call to Arms" tabletop wargame by Mongoose Publishing, the Drazi have numerous other craft, from small fighters up to large dreadnoughts.
As the series progresses (the year 2262 according to the storyline), it was revealed that the Drazi had begun several wars of aggression against weaker races.
The Dilgar were a race depicted in the show as an aggressive, warlike species who began a massive expansion of their empire when it was discovered their sun was soon to go supernova.
After the intervention of the Earth Alliance, the Dilgar were forced all the way back to their homeworld.
The Dilgar are depicted as humanoid with pointed ears similar to Vulcans.
The Zener are a humanoid species similar to the Strieb and the Vree.
In the episode "Ship of Tears" they were shown to be helping the Shadows prepare people for their battlecruisers with advanced cyber-technology.
They were later shown to be on Centauri Prime in the episode "Movements of Fire and Shadow", helping the Drakh prepare Londo for his keeper as well as in flashbacks in the episode "The Exercise of Vital Powers".
The Hand are an incredibly ancient race claimed by those who serve them to be more powerful than even The Shadows.
While the ships seen in use by The Hand in the Babylon 5 feature-length production The Legend of the Rangers are described by Minister Kafta as being "toys given to those races which serve The Hand", they are indeed still very powerful.
The Hand is behind the events of The Legend of the Rangers, but are not mentioned in any other Babylon 5 media.
Carnivorous Reptiles that stand at a towering 5-6 meters.
When one of these creatures consumes a part of a sentient, a psychic link is formed with that individual that can last years and the creature will actually use that person to scout for it without realizing what they're doing.
They are clearly sentient, as the individual seen in the episode "The Long Dark" was able to board a ship and reprogram its computer, and they are very patient.
According to JMS in The Lurker's Guide to Babylon 5 this species is "one of their lower-level types.
The pak'ma'ra were members of the League of Non-Aligned Worlds and are members of the Interstellar Alliance.
Loosely humanoid in form, the pak'ma'ra have tentacles around a mouth cavity containing an inflexible beak, somewhat reminiscent of the mind flayers or Cthulhu.
The pak'ma'ra were one of the few other races to be susceptible to the Drafa Plague, though, unlike the Markab, their numbers were not threatened by Second Outbreak in 2259.
In the final episode "Sleeping in Light", Vir Cotto remarks that he and Londo had once passed a group of pak'ma'ra who were singing in their quarters, and that,"It was the most beautiful sound I had ever heard."
The Centauri Republic, once a mighty empire, has grown decadent and is in a slow decline [REF].
The Centauri were the first alien race to openly contact humanity.
It is worth noting that the name "Centauri Republic" is a misnomer, since the Centauri government is not a republic at all but rather a monarchy.
The Gaim are an insectoid race and were a member-race of the League of Non-Aligned Worlds and are members of the Interstellar Alliance.
The Gaim are ruled by six hive-queens who dictate the behavior of all Gaim.
Realizing that they faced alien enemies as well as each other, the Queens began making contact with aliens in an effort to ensure their species' continued survival.
The Gaim had only been in space briefly when agents of the Shadows began making themselves apparent in the galaxy.
Lou Ann Barton - (February 17, 1954-) Born in Austin, Texas, Barton is a blues-rock and Texas blues singer who has performed with artists like Stevie Ray Vaughan and The Fabulous Thunderbirds.
Bobby "Blue" Bland - (January 27, 1930-) Born in Rosemark, Tennessee as Robert Calvin Bland, he is an American singer of blues and soul.
Zuzu Bollin - (September 5, 1922-October 2, 1990) Born in Frisco, Texas, he recorded "Why Don't You Eat Where You Slept Last Night," "Headlight Blues" and "Stavin' Chain" / "Cry, Cry, Cry".
Juke Boy Bonner - (March 22, 1932-June 29, 1978) Born in Bellville, Texas as Weldon Bonner, Bonner was a Texas blues and West Coast blues guitarist and blues harp player as well as a vocalist.
Doyle Bramhall - (February 17, 1949-November 12, 2011) Born in Dallas, Texas, Bramhall is strictly a Texas blues musician, a guitarist, drummer and singer who worked with Stevie Ray Vaughan and his brother Jimmie Vaughan.
Clarence "Gatemouth" Brown - (April 18, 1924-September 10, 2005) Born in Vinton, Louisiana, Brown was one of the regulars of the Texas blues scene.
Ezra Charles - (June 17, 1944-) Born in Texarkana, Texas as Charles Helpinstill.
Arnett Cobb - (August 10, 1918-March 24, 1989) Born in Houston, Texas, Cobb is most remembered as a jazz tenor saxophonist, though his contributions to Texas blues and other sounds like New York blues and jump blues should not be taken lightly.
Albert Collins - (October 1, 1932-November 24, 1993) Born in Leona, Texas, Collins was one of the true greats of the Texas blues scene.
Johnny Copeland - (March 27, 1937-June 3, 1997) Born in Haynesville, Louisiana, Copeland was both an acoustic and electric Texas blues guitarist and vocalist who only enjoyed real success late in his career during the 1990s.
Pee Wee Crayton - (December 18, 1914-June 25, 1985) Born in Rockdale, Texas, Crayton was a frequent member of the Texas blues scene.
James "Thunderbird" Davis - (November 10, 1938 - January 24, 1992)[REF] Born in born in Prichard, Alabama, United States, Davis recorded several singles for Duke Records in the early 1960s, enjoying moderate success with "Blue Monday" (1963).
Larry Davis - (December 4, 1936 - April 19, 1994) Born in Kansas City, Missouri but raised in Little Rock, Arkansas, Davis was an acoustic and electric Texas blues and soul blues musician who was greatly influenced by Albert King.
Chris Duarte - (born February 16, 1963) Born in San Antonio, Texas) is a guitarist, singer, and songwriter.
The Fabulous Thunderbirds - Formed in 1974 in Austin, Texas by Jimmie Vaughan and others, this group played the gamut of music.
Guy Forsyth - born in Austin, Texas, Forsyth is a guitarist, singer, harmonica player, interpreter and songwriter.
Denny Freeman - (August 7, 1944-) Born in Orlando, Florida), Freeman is a Texas blues electric guitarist, pianist and organist.
Lowell Fulson - (March 31, 1921-March 6, 1999) Born in Tulsa, Oklahoma, Fulson was an innovator who performed guitar and sang in a variety of blues-based genres, particularly soul-blues, electric Texas blues and West Coast blues, as well as urban blues.
Harmonica Slim - (December 21, 1934-June 16, 1984), was an American blues harmonicist, singer and songwriter [REF].
Andrew "Smokey" Hogg - (January 27, 1914-May 1, 1960) Born in Westconnie, Texas, Hogg began his career as a rhythm and blues musician.
Lightnin' Hopkins - (March 15, 1912-January 30, 1982) Born Sam Hopkins in Centerville, Texas, Hopkins was an acoustic and electric guitarist and a major exponent of Texas blues.
Joe "Guitar" Hughes - (c. 1938-May 19, 2003) Born in Houston, Texas.
Long John Hunter - Born John Thurman Hunter in 1931, he released three albums on Alligator Records in the 1990s.
Alan Haynes (February 19, 1956) Born in Houston, Texas, is an American Texas Blues guitarist.
Rocky Hill (December 1, 1946-April 10, 2009, and brother of ZZ Top bassist Dusty Hill) was a blues guitarist, singer, and bassist from Dallas, Texas.
Melvin Jackson - (August 16, 1915-May 30, 1976) Born in Tyler, Texas, Jackson was a regular of the Texas blues scene, an acoustic and electric country blues guitarist and singer who seemed most comfortable performing acoustic.
Blind Lemon Jefferson - (September 24, 1893-Mid-December 1929) Born in Coutchman, Texas.
Blind Willie Johnson - (January 22, 1897-September 18, 1945) Born near Brenham, Texas was first and foremost a gospel blues guitarist and singer, an early innovator of the slide guitar (using a pocketknife).
Eric Johnson - (August 17, 1954-) Guitarist from Austin, Texas.
Tutu Jones - (September 9, 1966-) Born in Dallas, Texas), is an electric blues and soul blues guitarist, singer and songwriter, who has released five albums since 1994.
Bnois King - (January 21, 1943-) Born in Delhi, Louisiana, King was the regular rhythm guitarist and vocalist for the Smokin' Joe Kubek band, and eventually full partner with Kubek, as well as supporting a solo career, especially as a composer, as of 2015.
Freddie King - (September 3, 1934-December 28, 1976) Born in Gilmer, Texas, King was an electric rhythm and blues and Texas blues guitarist who performed with a long list of blues greats throughout his career.
Bob Kirkpatrick - (January 10, 1934-) Born in Haynesville, Louisiana, he later settled in Dallas and has released three albums to date.
Smokin' Joe Kubek - (November 30, 1956-October 11, 2015) Born in Grove City, Pennsylvania but raised mostly in Texas, Kubek was an electric blues guitarist and vocalist in the Texas blues tradition.
Ida May Mack - (unknown-unknown) - Mack recorded eight songs in August 1928, six of which were issued by Victor at that time.
Mark May - Born in Ohio,Blues and Rock singer, guitarist and songwriter, whose career has spanned over two decades and has released five albums.
Pete Mayes - (1938-2008) - Born in Double Bayou, singer, and songwriter, whose career spanned six decades.
T-Bone Walker - (May 28, 1910-March 16, 1975) Born in Linden, Texas as Aaron Thibeaux Walker, T-Bone Walker is easily one of the most well known artists of Texas blues.
Johnny "Guitar" Watson - (February 3, 1935-May 17, 1996) Born in Houston, Texas, Watson had his beginnings performing Texas blues, a tradition he embraced until his death in 1996 while touring in Japan.
Lavelle White - Born July 3, 1929 in Amite City, Louisiana, White recorded for Duke Records in the 1950s and early 1960s, before issuing a comeback album in 1994 on Antone's Records.
Hop Wilson - (April 27, 1927-August 27, 1975) Born in Grapeland, Texas, Wilson was both an acoustic and electric Texas blues guitarist and singer (he also occasionally performed on blues harp).
Kim Wilson - (January 6, 1951-) Born in Detroit, Michigan, Wilson is best known as the leader of The Fabulous Thunderbirds.
U.P. Wilson - (September 4, 1934-September 22, 2004) Born in Caddo Parish, Shreveport, Louisiana, Wilson was an electric blues guitarist and singer who performed Texas blues.
Johnny Winter - (February 23, 1944- July 16, 2014) Born in Beaumont, Texas, Winter is a popular attraction on the Texas blues circuit.
Buddy Whittington - (December 28, 1956-) Born in Fort Worth, Texas, appeared on countless Mayall shows and recordings worldwide for the 15 years between 1993 and 2008.
The main tribes in Meghalaya are the Khasis, the Garos, and the Jaintias.
The majority of population and the major tribal groups in Meghalaya follow a matrilineal system where lineage and inheritance are traced through women.
The Khasi and Jaintia tribesmen follow the traditional matrilineal norm, wherein the Khun Khatduh (or the youngest daughter) inherits all the property and responsibilities for the family.
In the Garo lineage system, the youngest daughter inherits the family property by default, unless another daughter is so named by the parents.
Meghalaya has one of the world's largest surviving matrilineal cultures.
All the three major ethnic tribal groups, namely, the Khasis, Jaintias and the Garos also have their own traditional political institutions that have existed for hundreds of years.
In the traditional political system of the Khasis, each clan had its own council known as the Dorbar Kur which was presided over by the clan headman.
The Jaintias also had a three tier political system somewhat similar to the Khasis, including the Raids and the Syiem [REF].
In the traditional political system of the Garos a group of Garo villages comprised the A·king.
Khasis Dance is central to the culture of Khasi life, and a part of the rites of passage.
Jaintias Festivals of the Jaintia Hills, like others, is integral to the culture of people of Jaintia Hills.
Garos For Garos, festivals sustain their cultural heritage.
Hajongs Hajongs follow Hindu rites and customs.
In southern Meghalaya, located in Mawsynram, is the Mawjymbuin cave.
The significant issues in the state include illegal migrants from Bangladesh, incidences of violence, political instability and deforestation from traditional cut-and-burn shift farming practices.There are several clashes between khasi people and Bangladeshi Muslims in Meghalaya.
Illegal immigration has become a major issue in Indian states that surround Bangladesh - West Bengal to the west, Meghalaya and Assam to the north, and Tripura, Mizoram and Manipur to the east.
Chief Minister Mukul Sangma, in August 2012, called upon Government of India to take corrective measures to stop the illegal immigration of Bangladeshis into the northeast of the country before the situation goes out of hand [REF].
Between 2006 and 2013, between 0 and 28 civilians have died per year in Meghalaya (or about 0 to 1 per 100,000 people), which the state authorities have classified as terror-related intentional violence [REF].
The state has had 23 state governments since its inception in 1972, with a median life span of less than 18 months.
Jhum farming, or cut-and-burn shift cultivation, is an ancient practice in Meghalaya [REF].
In modern times, shift cultivation is a significant threat to the biodiversity of Meghalaya [REF].
The Meghalaya Legislative Assembly has 60 members at present.
Since the creation of the state the Gauhati High Court has jurisdiction in Meghalaya.
In order to provide local self-governance machinery to the rural population of the country, provisions were made in the Constitution of India; accordingly, the Panchayati Raj institutions were set up.
The partition of the country in 1947 created severe infrastructural constraints for the Northeastern region, with merely 2% of the perimeter of the region adjoining the rest of the country.
When Meghalaya was carved out of Assam as an autonomous state in 1972, it inherited a total road length of 2786.68 km including 174 km of National Highways with road density of 12.42 km per 100 square kilometre.
Meghalaya has a road network of around 7,633 km, out of which 3,691 km is black-topped and the remaining 3942 km is gravelled.
Meghalaya has a railhead at and regular train service connecting Mendipathar in Meghalaya and Guwahati in Assam, has started on November 30, 2014 [REF].
State capital Shillong has an airport at Umroi from Shillong on the Guwahati-Shillong highway.
Meghalaya schools are run by the state government or by private organisations, including religious institutions.
Under the 10+2+3 plan, after completing secondary school, students typically enroll for two years in a junior college, also known as pre-university, or in schools with a higher secondary facility affiliated with the Meghalaya Board of School Education or any central board.
Some institutes like Indian Institute of Management, Shillong, Regional Institute of Science and Technology, North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical Sciences, National Institute of Technology, Meghalaya, Indian Institute of Professional Studies, National Institute of Fashion Technology are also present.
Meghalaya is predominantly an agrarian economy.
Meghalaya's gross state domestic product for 2012 was estimated at in current prices [REF].
Meghalaya is basically an agricultural state with about 80% of its population depending entirely on agriculture for their livelihood.
Meghalaya produced 230,000 tonnes of food grains in 2001.
Oilseeds such as rapeseed, mustard, linseed, soybean, castor and sesame are grown on nearly .
Climatic conditions in Meghalaya permit a large variety of horticulture crops including fruits, vegetables, flowers, spices, mushrooms and medicinal plants [REF].
Areca nut plantations can be seen all over the state, especially around the road from Guwahati to Shillong.
Meghalaya has a rich base of natural resources.
Meghalaya with its high mountains, deep gorges and abundant rains has a large, unused hydroelectric potential.
Several projects are under works.
Meghalaya has a literacy rate of 62.56 as per the 2001 census and is the 27th most literate state in India.
Institution for higher studies like Indian Institute of Management, the University of Technology and Management which is in Shillong is the first Indian university to introduce cloud computing engineering as a field of study, in collaboration with IBM and the University of Petroleum and Energy Studies.
The state has 13 state government dispensaries, 22 community health centres, 93 primary health centres, 408 sub-centres.
Earlier, foreign tourists required special permits to enter the areas that now constitute the state of Meghalaya.
Cherrapunji is one of the popular tourist locations in north-east of India.
Waterfalls and rivers The popular waterfalls in the state are the Elephant Falls, Shadthum Falls, Weinia falls, Bishop Falls, Nohkalikai Falls, Langshiang Falls and Sweet Falls.
Nongkhnum Island located in the West Khasi Hills district is the biggest river island in Meghalaya and the second biggest in Asia.
Sacred groves Meghalaya is also known for its "sacred groves".
Rural areas Meghalaya rural life and villages offer a glimpse in northeast mountain life.
Lakes Meghalaya also has many natural and manmade lakes.
Balpakram National Park with its pristine habitat and scenery is a major attraction [REF].
Caves Meghalaya has an estimated 500 natural limestone and sandstone caves spread over the entire state including most of the longest and deepest caves in the sub-continent.
Meghalaya is famous for its living root bridges, a kind of suspension bridge made over rivers using intertwined roots of Ficus elastica trees planted on opposite banks of the river or hill slopes.
Ancient Meghalaya, along with neighboring Indian states, have been of archeological interest.
The Khasi, Garo, and Jaintia tribes had their own kingdoms until they came under British administration in the 19th century.
At the time of Indian independence in 1947, present day Meghalaya constituted two districts of Assam and enjoyed limited autonomy within the state of Assam.
In 1971, the Parliament passed the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganization) Act, 1971, which conferred full statehood on the autonomous state of Meghalaya.
Meghalaya is one of the Seven Sister States of northeast India.
The elevation of the plateau ranges between to .
With average annual rainfall as high as in some areas, Meghalaya is the wettest place on earth [REF].
The town of Sohra (Cherrapunji) in the Khasi Hills south of capital Shillong holds the world record for most rain in a calendar month, while the village of Mawsynram, near Sohra (Cherrapunji), holds the record for the most rain in a year [REF].
About 70% of the state is forested, of which is dense primary subtropical forest [REF].
Due to diverse climatic and topographic conditions, Meghalayan forests support a vast floral diversity, including a large variety of parasites, epiphytes, succulent plants and shrubs.
Meghalaya also has a large variety of mammals, birds, reptiles and insects [REF].
Common reptiles in Meghalaya are lizards, crocodiles and tortoises.
Meghalaya's forests host 660 species of birds, many of which are endemic to Himalayan foothills, Tibet and southeast Asia.
Meghalaya currently has 11 districts [REF].
The Jaintia Hills district was created on 22 February 1972.
The East Khasi Hills district was carved out of the Khasi Hills on 28 October 1976.
The Ri-Bhoi district was formed by further division of East Khasi Hills district on 4 June 1992.
The West Khasi Hills district is the largest district in the state with a geographical area of .
The East Garo Hills district was formed in 1976 and has a population of 247,555 as per the 2001 census.
The West Garo Hills district lies in the western part of the state and covers a geographical area of .
The South Garo Hills district came into existence on 18 June 1992 after the division of the West Garo Hills district.
As of 2012, there are 11 districts, 16 towns and an estimated 6,026 villages in Meghalaya [REF].
Tribal people make up the majority of Meghalaya's population.
Meghalaya recorded the highest decennial population growth of 27.82% among all the seven north-eastern states, as per the provisional report of census 2011.
The Christianity is the majority religion of Meghalaya.
Out of the 689,639 Garo living in Meghalaya, most were Christians as of 2001 Census, 49,917 follow their original religion (Songsarek), 9,129 were Hindu, 8,980 Muslims and 999 were Buddhist.
Conversion from indigenous to Christianity began in the 19th century under the British era.
English is the official and widely spoken language of the state [REF].
Khasi (also spelled Khasia, Khassee, Cossyah and Kyi) is a branch of the Mon-Khmer family of the Austroasiatic stock and according to 2001 census, Khasi is spoken by about 1,128,575 people residing in Meghalaya.
The Garo language has a close affinity with the Koch and Bodo languages, a small family of Tibeto-Burman languages.
Several other languages are spoken in Meghalaya.
English is spoken as a common language across the diverse ethnic and demographic groups.
The problem is usually restricted to two dimensions by using a velocity along the x axis such that the y and z coordinates do not intervene, as described in standard configuration above.
The transformation equations can be derived from time dilation and length contraction,[REF] which in turn can be derived from first principles.
The following is similar to that of Einstein [REF].
Consider two inertial frames of reference O and O′, assuming O to be at rest while O′ is moving with a velocity v with respect to O in the positive x-direction.
The origin O′ is moving along x-axis.
x′ must vary linearly with x and t.
The Lorentz transformation is not the only transformation leaving invariant the shape of spherical waves, as there is a wider set of spherical wave transformations in the context of conformal geometry, leaving invariant the expression \lambda\left(\delta x^{2}+\delta y^{2}+\delta z^{2}-c^{2}\delta t^{2}\right).
In classical kinematics, the total displacement x in the R frame is the sum of the relative displacement x′ in frame R′ and of the distance between the two origins x − x′.
In Einstein's relativity, the main difference from Galilean relativity is that space and time coordinates are intertwined, and in different inertial frames t ≠ t′.
Since space is assumed to be homogeneous, the transformation must be linear.
An object at rest in the R′ frame at position x′ = 0 moves with constant velocity v in the R frame.
Since the speed of light is the same in all frames of reference, for the case of a light signal, the transformation must guarantee that t = x/c when t′ = x′/c.
When the transformation equations are required to satisfy the light signal equations in the form x = ct and x′ = ct′, by substituting the x and x'-values, the same technique produces the same expression for the Lorentz factor [REF].
In his popular book[REF] Einstein derived the Lorentz transformation by arguing that there must be two non-zero coupling constants and such that .
that correspond to light traveling along the positive and negative x-axis, respectively.
\begin{cases} x' = \gamma x - bct \\ ct' = \gamma ct - bx .
Substituting corresponding to and noting that the relative velocity is , this gives .
The constant can be evaluated by demanding as per standard configuration.
The Lorentz transformations can also be derived by simple application of the special relativity postulates and using hyperbolic identities [REF].
(ct)^2 - (x^2+y^2+z^2) = (ct')^2 - (x'^2+y'^2+z'^2) =0 .
which take the same form in both frames because of the special relativity postulates.
(ct)^2 - x^2 = (ct')^2 - x'^2 .
where A, B, C, D are to be found.
(ct)^2 - x^2 = [(Cx)^2 + (Dct)^2 + 2CDcxt] - [(Ax)^2 + (Bct)^2 + 2ABcxt] .
The formulae resemble the hyperbolic identity .
Introducing the rapidity parameter ϕ as a parametric hyperbolic angle allows the self-consistent identifications .
A=D=\cosh\phi\,,\quad C = B = -\sinh\phi .
where the signs after the square roots are chosen so that x and t increase.
If the signs were chosen differently the position and time coordinates would need to be replaced by −x and/or −t so that x and t increase not decrease.
0 = \cosh\phi vt - \sinh\phi ct \, \Rightarrow \, \tanh\phi = \frac{v}{c} = \beta .
and manipulation of hyperbolic identities leads to the relations between β, γ, and ϕ, .
\cosh\phi = \gamma,\,\quad \sinh\phi=\beta\gamma \,.
Following is a classical derivation (see, e.g., and references therein) based on group postulates and isotropy of the space.
Coordinate transformations as a group The coordinate transformations between inertial frames form a group (called the proper Lorentz group) with the group operation being the composition of transformations (performing one transformation after another).
Let us now consider the motion of the origin of the frame K′.
Now let us consider the group postulate inverse element.
The second is, considering that the K′ coordinate system is moving at a velocity v relative to the K coordinate system, the K coordinate system must be moving at a velocity −v relative to the K′ coordinate system.
Now the function can not depend upon the direction of because it is apparently the factor which defines the relativistic contraction and time dilation.
According to the closure group postulate a composition of two coordinate transformations is also a coordinate transformation, thus the product of two of our matrices should also be a matrix of the same form.
In the original transform matrix, the main diagonal elements are both equal to , hence, for the combined transform matrix above to be of the same form as the original transform matrix, the main diagonal elements must also be equal.
The denominator will be nonzero for nonzero , because is always nonzero; .
\gamma^2 + v \delta \gamma = 1.
If we have the identity matrix which coincides with putting in the matrix we get at the end of this derivation for the other values of , making the final matrix valid for all nonnegative .
For the nonzero , this combination of function must be a universal constant, one and the same for all inertial frames.
If , then there would be transformations (with ) which transform time into a spatial coordinate and vice versa.
Lorentz transformations If , then we set c=1/\sqrt{-\kappa} which becomes the invariant speed, the speed of light in vacuum.
If the Galilean transformation is a good approximation to the Lorentz transformation.
Only experiment can answer the question which of the two possibilities, or , is realised in our world.
Using rapidity to parametrize the Lorentz transformation, the boost in the direction is .
\begin{bmatrix} c t' \\ x' \\ y' \\ z' \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} \cosh\phi & -\sinh\phi & 0 & 0\\ -\sinh\phi & \cosh\phi & 0 & 0\\ 0&0&1&0\\ 0&0&0&1\\ \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} c\,t \\ x \\ y \\ z \end{bmatrix} , .
likewise for a boost in the -direction .
\begin{bmatrix} c t' \\ x' \\ y' \\ z' \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} \cosh\phi & 0 & -\sinh\phi & 0\\ 0&1&0&0\\ -\sinh\phi &0& \cosh\phi &0\\ 0&0&0&1\\ \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} c\,t \\ x \\ y \\ z \end{bmatrix} , .
\begin{bmatrix} c t' \\ x' \\ y' \\ z' \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} \cosh\phi &0&0&-\sinh\phi\\ 0&1&0&0\\ 0&0&1&0\\ -\sinh\phi&0&0&\cosh\phi\\ \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} c\,t \\ x \\ y \\ z \end{bmatrix} \,.
where are the Cartesian basis vectors, a set of mutually perpendicular unit vectors along their indicated directions.
\begin{bmatrix} c\,t' \\ x' \\ y' \\ z' \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} \cosh\phi & -n_x\sinh\phi & -n_y\sinh\phi & -n_z\sinh\phi\\ -n_x\sinh\phi & 1+(\cosh\phi-1)n_x^2&(\cosh\phi-1)n_x n_y&(\cosh\phi-1)n_x n_z\\ -n_y\sinh\phi & (\cosh\phi-1)n_y n_x&1+(\cosh\phi-1)n_y^2&(\cosh\phi-1)n_y n_z\\ -n_z\sinh\phi & (\cosh\phi-1)n_z n_x&(\cosh\phi-1)n_z n_y&1+(\cosh\phi-1)n_z^2\\ \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} c\,t \\ x \\ y \\ z \end{bmatrix}\,.
Notice the matrix depends on the direction of the relative motion as well as the rapidity, in all three numbers (two for direction, one for rapidity).
We can cast each of the boost matrices in another form as follows.
where the derivatives of the matrix with respect to are given by differentiating each entry of the matrix separately, and the notation indicates is set to zero after the derivatives are evaluated.
which is valid if is small (hence and higher powers are negligible), and can be interpreted as no boost (the first term is the 4×4 identity matrix), followed by a small boost.
Now, is small, so dividing by a positive integer gives an even smaller increment of rapidity , and of these infinitesimal boosts will give the original infinitesimal boost with rapidity , .
In the limit of an infinite number of infinitely small steps, we obtain the finite boost transformation .
which is the limit definition of the exponential due to Leonhard Euler, and is now true for any .
Repeating the process for the boosts in the and directions obtains the other generators .
and the boosts are .
For any direction, the infinitesimal transformation is (small and expansion to first order) .
Then in the limit of an infinite number of infinitely small steps, we obtain the finite boost transformation .
which is now true for any .
e^{-\phi\mathbf{n}\cdot\mathbf{K}} = \sum_{n=0}^{\infty}\frac{1}{n!}(-\phi \mathbf{n}\cdot\mathbf{K})^n .
we now need the powers of the generator.
but the cube returns to , and as always the zeroth power is the 4×4 identity, .
while the even powers are .
therefore the explicit form of the boost matrix depends only the generator and its square.
where is introduced for the even power series to complete the Taylor series for .
B(\mathbf{n},\phi) = e^{-\phi\mathbf{n}\cdot\mathbf{K}} = I -\sinh\phi(\mathbf{n}\cdot\mathbf{K})+(\cosh\phi-1)(\mathbf{n}\cdot\mathbf{K})^2 \,.
Negating the rapidity in the exponential gives the inverse transformation matrix, .
B(\mathbf{n},-\phi) = e^{\phi\mathbf{n}\cdot\mathbf{K}} = I +\sinh\phi(\mathbf{n}\cdot\mathbf{K})+(\cosh\phi-1)(\mathbf{n}\cdot\mathbf{K})^2 \,.
In quantum mechanics, relativistic quantum mechanics, and quantum field theory, a different convention is used for the boost generators; all of the boost generators are multiplied by a factor of the imaginary unit .
In the fundamental branches of modern physics, namely general relativity and its widely applicable subset special relativity, as well as relativistic quantum mechanics and relativistic quantum field theory, the Lorentz transformation is the transformation rule under which all four-vectors and tensors containing physical quantities transform.
The prime examples of such four vectors are the four position and four momentum of a particle, and for fields the electromagnetic tensor and stress-energy tensor.
Given the components of the four vectors or tensors in some frame, the "transformation rule" allows one to determine the altered components of the same four vectors or tensors in another frame, which could be boosted or accelerated, relative to the original frame.
Pick any reference frame in the collection.
For the Lorentz transformation to have physical significance, it is crucial that the interval is an invariant measure for any two events, not just for those separated by light signals.
ds^2 = c^2dt^2 - dx^2 - dy^2 - dz^2, .
as recorded in a system .
Now one observes that on the right, does not only depend on and , but also on the angle between the vectors and .
The invariant interval can be seen as a non-positive definite distance function on spacetime.
The interval is quite trivially invariant under translation.
It remains to find a "rotation" in the three remaining coordinate planes that leaves the interval invariant.
c^2(t_2 - t_1)^2 - (x_2 - x_1)^2 = c^2(t_2' - t_1')^2 - (x_2' - x_1')^2.
The standard configuration is used in most examples below.
c^2t^2 - x^2 = c^2t'^2 - x'^2 .
solves the more general problem since coordinate differences then transform the same way.
c^2t^2 - x^2 = c^2t'^2 - x'^2.
To find the role of in the physical setting, record the origin's of progression, i.e.
x = ct'\sinh \Psi, \quad ct = ct'\cosh \Psi.
\frac{x}{ct} = \tanh \Psi = \frac{v}{c} \Rightarrow \quad \sinh \Psi= \frac{\frac{v}{c}}{\sqrt{1-{\frac{v^2}{c^2}}}}, \quad \cosh\Psi = \frac{1}{\sqrt{1-{\frac{v^2}{c^2}}}}, .
where was used in the first step, (H2) and (H3) in the second, which, when plugged back in , gives .
x=\frac{x'+vt'}{\sqrt{1-\frac{v^2}{c^2}}}, \quad t= \frac{t'+\frac{v}{c^2}x'}{\sqrt{1-\frac{v^2}{c^2}}}, .
or, with the usual abbreviations, .
This calculation is repeated with more detail in section hyperbolic rotation.
The usual treatment (e.g., Einstein's original work) is based on the invariance of the speed of light.
Michelson and Morley in 1887 designed an experiment, employing an interferometer and a half-silvered mirror, that was accurate enough to detect aether flow.
In a 1964 paper,[REF] Erik Christopher Zeeman showed that the causality preserving property, a condition that is weaker in a mathematical sense than the invariance of the speed of light, is enough to assure that the coordinate transformations are the Lorentz transformations.
As mentioned, the general problem is solved by translations in spacetime.
Lorentz transformations ⊂ Poincare transformations ⊂ conformal group transformations.
Some equations of physics are conformal invariant, e.g. the Maxwell's equations in source-free space,[REF] but not all.
The Bangkok city proper covers an area of , ranking 69th among the other 76 provinces of Thailand.
Bangkok is in the Chao Phraya River delta in Thailand's central plains.
This intricate waterway network served as the primary mode of transport up until the late 19th century, when modern roads began to be built.
The geology of the Bangkok area is characterized by a top layer of soft marine clay known as Bangkok clay, averaging in thickness, which overlies an aquifer system consisting of eight known units.
There are no mountains in Bangkok, the closest mountain range being the Khao Khiao Massif, located about southeast of the city.
Like most of Thailand, Bangkok has a tropical savanna climate under the Köppen climate classification and is under the influence of the South Asian monsoon system.
Bangkok's fifty districts serve as administrative subdivisions under the authority of the BMA.
The BMA uses several schemes to organize the districts into groups for administrative and general planning purposes.
Bangkok's district areas often do not accurately represent the functional divisions of its neighbourhoods or actual land uses.
Bangkok's historic centre remains the Rattanakosin Island in Phra Nakhon District.
In contrast with the low-rise historic areas, the business district on Si Lom and Sathon Roads in Bang Rak and Sathon Districts teems with skyscrapers.
Bangkok lacks a single distinct central business district.
While most of Bangkok's streets are fronted by vernacular shophouses, the largely unrestricted building frenzy of the 1980s has transformed the city into an urban jungle of skyscrapers and high rises exhibiting contrasting and clashing styles [REF].
Bangkok has several parks, although these amount to a per-capita total park area of only in the city proper.
Bangkok's largest parks include the centrally located Lumphini Park near the Si Lom - Sathon business district with an area of , the Suanluang Rama IX in the east of the city, and the Chatuchak-Queen Sirikit-Wachirabenchathat park complex in northern Bangkok, which has a combined area of [REF].
Bangkok is one of the world's top tourist destination cities. MasterCard ranked Bangkok as the top destination city by international visitor arrivals in its Global Destination Cities Index 2016, ahead of London with more than 21 million overnight visitors [REF].
As the main gateway through which visitors arrive in Thailand, Bangkok is visited by the majority of international tourists to the country.
Bangkok's multi-faceted sights, attractions and city life appeal to diverse groups of tourists.
Among Bangkok's well-known sights are the Grand Palace and major Buddhist temples, including Wat Phra Kaew, Wat Pho, and Wat Arun.
Shopping venues, many of which are popular with both tourists and locals, range from the shopping centres and department stores concentrated in Siam and Ratchaprasong to the sprawling Chatuchak Weekend Market.
Bangkok has a reputation overseas as a major destination in the sex industry.
Issues often encountered by foreign tourists include scams, overcharging and dual pricing.
Bangkok has long been the centre of modern education in Thailand.
Over the past few decades the general trend of pursuing a university degree has prompted the founding of new universities to meet the needs of Thai students.
Much of Thailand's medical resources are disproportionately concentrated in the capital.
Research-oriented medical school affiliates such as Siriraj, King Chulalongkorn Memorial and Ramathibodi Hospitals are among the largest in the country, and act as tertiary care centres, receiving referrals from distant parts of the country.
Bangkok is the economic centre of Thailand, and the heart of the country's investment and development.
Wholesale and retail trade is the largest sector in the city's economy, contributing 24.0 percent of Bangkok's gross provincial product.
The Stock Exchange of Thailand (SET) is located on Ratchadaphisek Road in inner Bangkok.
Bangkok is home to the headquarters of all of Thailand's major commercial banks and financial institutions, as well as the country's largest companies.
Income inequality is a major issue in Bangkok, especially between relatively unskilled lower-income immigrants from rural provinces and neighbouring countries, and middle-class professionals and business elites.
Bangkok has a relatively moderate crime rate when compared to urban counterparts around the world [REF].
Although the crime threat in Bangkok is relatively low, non-confrontational crimes of opportunity such as pick-pocketing, purse-snatching, and credit card fraud occur with frequency [REF].
According to police statistics, the most common complaint received by the Metropolitan Police Bureau in 2010 was housebreaking, with 12,347 cases.
Political demonstrations and protests are common in Bangkok.
Traffic accidents are a major hazard in Bangkok.
The city of Bangkok is locally governed by the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration (BMA).
Bangkok is subdivided into fifty districts (khet, equivalent to amphoe in the other provinces), which are further subdivided into 169 subdistricts (khwaeng, equivalent to tambon).
The BMA is divided into sixteen departments, each overseeing different aspects of the administration's responsibilities.
The seal of the city shows Hindu god Indra riding in the clouds on Airavata, a divine white elephant known in Thai as Erawan.
As the capital of Thailand, Bangkok is the seat of all branches of the national government.
The city's formal international relations are managed by the International Affairs Division of the BMA.
With its location at the heart of mainland Southeast Asia and as one of Asia's hubs of transportation, Bangkok is home to many international and regional organizations.
Bangkok has made sister city and/or friendship agreements with twenty-seven other cities in sixteen countries, [REF].
The city of Bangkok has a population of 8,280,925 according to the 2010 census, or 12.6 percent of the national population [REF].
Although it has been Thailand's largest population centre since its establishment as capital city in 1782, Bangkok grew only slightly throughout the 18th and early 19th centuries.
The majority of Bangkok's population are of Thai ethnicity, although details on the city's ethnic make-up are unavailable, as the national census does not document race.
Apart from Yaowarat, Bangkok also has several other distinct ethnic neighbourhoods.
The history of Bangkok dates at least back to the early 15th century, when it was a village on the west bank of the Chao Phraya River, under the rule of Ayutthaya [REF].
Bangkok's economy gradually expanded through busy international trade, first with China, then with Western merchants returning in the early-to-mid 19th century.
Administration of the city was first formalized by King Chulalongkorn in 1906, with the establishment of Monthon Krung Thep Phra Maha Nakhon () as a national subdivision.
The culture of Bangkok reflects its position as Thailand's centre of wealth and modernisation.
A distinct feature of Bangkok is the ubiquity of street vendors selling goods ranging from food items to clothing and accessories.
In 2015, however, the BMA, with support from the National Council for Peace and Order (Thailand's ruling military junta), began cracking down on street vendors in a bid to reclaim public space.
The residents of Bangkok celebrate many of Thailand's annual festivals.
Sanam Luang is the site of the Thai Kite, Sport and Music Festival, usually held in March, and the Royal Ploughing Ceremony which takes place in May.
Bangkok is the centre of Thailand's media industry.
Bangkok is also the hub of Thailand's broadcast television.
Likewise, Bangkok has dominated the Thai film industry since its inception.
Traditional Thai art, long developed within religious and royal contexts, continues to be sponsored by various government agencies in Bangkok, including the Department of Fine Arts' Office of Traditional Arts.
The city's performing arts scene features traditional theatre and dance as well as Western-style plays.
Modern Bangkok has developed a strong spectator sport culture.
While sepak takraw can be seen played in open spaces throughout the city, especially by the working class, football and other modern sports are now more of the norm.
There are many public sporting facilities located throughout Bangkok.
Although Bangkok's canals historically served as a major mode of transport, they have long since been surpassed in importance by land traffic.
Bangkok is connected to the rest of the country through the national highway and rail networks, as well as by domestic flights to and from the city's two international airports.
The BMA is largely responsible for overseeing the construction and maintenance of the road network and transport systems through its Public Works Department and Traffic and Transportation Department.
Road-based transport is the primary mode of travel in Bangkok.
Bangkok's rapid growth in the 1980s resulted in sharp increases in vehicle ownership and traffic demand, which have since continued-in 2006 there were 3,943,211 in-use vehicles in Bangkok, of which 37.6 percent were private cars and 32.9 percent were motorcycles [REF].
Traffic has been the main source of air pollution in Bangkok, which reached serious levels in the 1990s.
Although the BMA has created thirty signed bicycle routes along several roads totalling ,[REF] cycling is still largely impractical, especially in the city centre.
Bangkok has an extensive bus network providing local transit services within the Greater Bangkok area.
Taxis are ubiquitous in Bangkok, and are a popular form of transport.
Despite their popularity, taxis have gained a bad reputation for often refusing passengers when the requested route is not to the driver's convenience [REF].
Bangkok is the location of Hua Lamphong Railway Station, the main terminus of the national rail network operated by the State Railway of Thailand (SRT).
The BTS consists of two lines, Sukhumvit and Silom, with thirty stations along .
Although initial passenger numbers were low and their service area remains limited to the inner city, these systems have become indispensable to many commuters.
, construction work is ongoing to extend BTS and MRT, as well as several additional transit lines, including the Light Red grade-separated commuter rail line.
Although much diminished from its past prominence, water-based transport still plays an important role in Bangkok and the immediate upstream and downstream provinces.
Bangkok Port, popularly known by its location as Khlong Toei Port, was Thailand's main international port from its opening in 1947 until it was superseded by the deep-sea Laem Chabang Port in 1991.
Bangkok is one of Asia's busiest air transport hubs.
The etymology of the name Bangkok (, pronounced in Thai as ) is not absolutely clear.
When King Rama I established his new capital on the river's eastern bank, the city inherited Ayutthaya's ceremonial name, of which there were many variants, including Krung Thep Thawarawadi Si Ayutthaya () and Krung Thep Maha Nakhon Si Ayutthaya () [REF].
The name is listed in Guinness World Records as the world's longest place name, at 168 letters [REF].
The conflict between Japan and the Soviet Union known as the Battle of Lake Khasan began.
A revolt broke out on the Greek island of Crete.
About 40 people were killed and over 250 injured in riots between Hindus and Muslims in Yangon [REF].
The musical drama film Little Miss Broadway starring Shirley Temple, Edna May Oliver and George Murphy was released.
The IOC awarded the 1940 Summer Olympics to Helsinki [REF].
George VI and Queen Elizabeth visited Paris and received a tremendous welcome [REF].
Salvador Dalí met one of his biggest influences, Sigmund Freud, in London.
Joan Crawford and Franchot Tone released a joint statement announcing their separation [REF].
The Siege of Gandesa began.
60 people were killed in a train crash in Jamaica [REF].
Gino Bartali of Italy won the Tour de France.
An international conference opened in Évian-les-Bains on the Jewish refugee situation in Europe [REF].
The National League beat the American League 4-1 in the Major League Baseball All-Star Game at Crosley Field in Cincinnati, Ohio.
American astronomer Seth Barnes Nicholson discovered Lysithea, the tenth moon of Jupiter to be identified from Earth [REF].
France and Turkey signed a pact on the Sanjak of Alexandretta, agreeing to settle the future of the region with an election [REF].
A referendum in Switzerland approved a new penal code [REF].
U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt dedicated the Eternal Light Peace Memorial on the Gettysburg Battlefield.
British locomotive Mallard set a new world record speed for steam engines of 126 miles per hour [REF].
Manfred von Brauchitsch of Germany won the French Grand Prix.
6 Jews were killed in another day of violence in Palestine [REF].
Turkey sent troops into the Sanjak of Alexandretta to oversee the referendum [REF].
Goiânia Esporte Clube was founded in Brazil.
The Nationalists pushed into the Province of Valencia [REF].
Japan notified the International Olympic Committee that it was forfeiting the 1940 Summer Olympics since it could not prepare for them while fighting the Second Sino-Japanese War.
Paul Runyan won the PGA Championship at Shawnee Country Club in Smithfield Township, Pennsylvania.
Seabiscuit won the first-ever Hollywood Gold Cup [REF].
The Levante Offensive ended in failure for the Nationalists.
At least 34 people were killed in Bogotá, Colombia when a stunt plane crashed into a crowd watching the inauguration of a new airfield.
Richard Seaman of the United Kingdom won the German Grand Prix.
Jewish schools in Nazi Germany lost tax exemption status [REF].
The four-day 1938 Gettysburg reunion began, commemorating the 75th anniversary of the Battle of Gettysburg.
Don Budge of the United States won his second straight Wimbledon title, defeating Harry Austin of the United Kingdom in the Gentlemen's Singles final [REF].
The Battle of the Ebro began when 80,000 Republicans started crossing the Ebro [REF].
A bomb explosion killed 43 Arabs in a crowded market in Haifa.
The fourth anniversary of the July Putsch was marked in Vienna as a day of "national pride" [REF].
Italian Fascist leader Achille Starace said that the Manifesto of Race must be followed by "ulterior political action."[REF]
Australia won the fourth test against England to retain The Ashes [REF].
Franz Joseph II became Sovereign Prince of Liechtenstein.
Fred Cassidy - A building-climbing, wise-cracking, perennial student is the last known person to have seen the missing star-stone, a unique alien crystalline object of unknown origin and function.
The Rhennius machine - An alien device can transform objects in different ways through its "inversion program."
Dennis Wexroth - Fred's latest academic counselor is determined to graduate Fred against his will.
Hal Sidmore - Fred's best friend and former roommate unknowingly switches a model of the star-stone for the real one in Professor Byler's laboratory.
Paul Byler - A professor of geology and world-renowned crystallographer manufactures replicas of the star-stone for the United Nations.
Charv and Ragma - Alien police officers investigate the theft of the star-stone in order to return it to the United Nations.
Morton Zeemeister and Jamie Buckler - Sadistic professional criminals are originally employed by Paul Byler and others in his extremist Anglophile group to plan the theft of the star-stone.
Speicus (the star-stone) - A sentient telepathic alien life form of unknown origin in the shape of a stone acts as a recorder and data processor of sociological information.
Doctor M'mrm'mlrr - An alien telepathic analyst practices a technique known as assault therapy.
Ted Nadler - A representative of the State Department persuades the university to award Fred a Ph.D in Anthropology and hires Fred as an alien culture expert for the U.S. legation to the United Nations.
The Whillowhim Agent - An alien disguised as a black cat desires the stone in order to keep Earth from joining a coalition of newer, weaker planets whose interests are at odds with the Whillowhim civilization and the massive power block of older, entrenched powers that it belongs to.
Ralph Warp - Fred's partner in the Warp and Woof, a crafts shop, lets Fred crash at his apartment.
The will of Fred Cassidy's cryogenically-frozen uncle provides him with a generous stipend to attend the university until he is awarded an academic degree.
Fred goes to his apartment and finds it ransacked.
Byler visits Hal Sidmore, Fred's ex-roommate, roughs him up and demands the model of the star-stone.
As part of his study plan Fred goes to the desert in Australia to study ancient carvings on a cliff.
Later, as he comes slowly into consciousness a voice instructs Fred that he should not permit the aliens to take him to another world where they want to telepathically examine his mind for clues to the whereabouts of the star-stone.
After being set down on Earth, Fred goes to visit Hal who reports that he receives phone calls from various people trying find Fred.
Fred goes bar-crawling to get drunk as Speicus instructs him.
By subterfuge Fred manages to reverse himself by going through the Rhennius machine.
Fred calls Hal and they agree to meet in a secret place.
Fred awakens in a hospital.
Nadler explains the history of the star-stone.
While shaving the next morning Fred remembers a smile that remains with him from his night's dreams.
In the building housing the Rhennius machine Doctor M'mrm'mlrr, the alien analyst, supervises the removal of the star-stone from Fred's body.
Ragma explains that the Whillowhim are one of the oldest, most powerful and entrenched cultures in the galaxy.
Fred's future is as an alien culture expert for the U.S. legation of the United Nations and as a host for Speicus.
Doorways is mostly narrated in the first person by its protagonist, Fred Cassidy.
Zelazny experimented with a of number of narrative techniques [REF].
Zelazny divided most chapters into two to five sections, placed the most mysterious or exciting part first, then arranged the other pieces of the narrative out of sequence.
Susan Wood in Locus magazine wrote, "Used sparingly, it could effectively create suspense.
More than half of Zelazny's novels have characters who are immortal or nearly immortal [REF].
Immortality for Zelazny generally meant an immortal can be killed like any other person, but not from old age.
In Doorways Fred achieves near immortality as a host for Speicus.
For Zelazny one of the attractions of immortality was that an immortal could continue to learn forever.
In college he often audited courses he found interesting in addition to his regular plan of studies.
In Doorways Fred has a similar program of studies, not just motivated by a desire to learn, but also to keep money flowing from his cryogenically-frozen uncle's trust fund.
During his thirteen years of studies at the university he takes just enough courses in each discipline to not receive a degree according to the mandatory departmental graduation requirements, making him very broadly-educated.
Zelazny wrote science fiction and fantasy, receiving Hugo and Nebula awards in both genres.
Jewels with supernatural properties are a staple in fantasy.
Zelazny takes the jewel fantasy motif and revises it into the star-stone in Doorways.
Another fantasy element that Zelazny converts to science fiction is Alice's looking glass.
In Doorways Zelazny reimagines Alice's looking glass as the Rhennius machine, the device given to man by the aliens that reverses objects into their mirror images.
And finally, Zelazny reenvisions another Alice artifact in Fred's mind.
However, at the end of Doorways Zelazny revises the rabbit hole again.
Zelazny's literary biographers have disagreed over the basic profile of his protagonists.
Zelazny portrays Fred as a hard partyer who sometimes drinks too much, a gambler, and a good student who wants to study but not get a degree.
In Doorways Fred goes through a series of life-changing experiences.
In the end he accepts a responsible position as an alien culture specialist for the U.S. legation to the United Nations.
Zelazny makes many obscure literary and scientific allusions.
Theordore Sturgeon in his introduction to Four For Tomorrow calls Zelazny's more obscure allusions "furniture."
Krulik takes the view that "It's a risky business, but Zelazny has enormous stylistic power, and his strong characterizations are usually able to draw back the reader to the written word after chewing momentarily on the morsel given to him for thought."[REF] .
Lindskold feels that in stories "the reader who is uninterested in delving into the subtext can still enjoy the story simply for the plot alone."[REF] .
Zelazny refers to Flatland and Sphereland, books which discuss applications in Euclidean (flat) and non-Euclidean (sphere) geometry [REF].
Along the same lines, Zelazny writes a nonsense poem, Lobachevsky alone has looked on beauty bare, evoking the non-Euclidean geometry of Lobachevsky and Riemann to describe the curves of the female anatomy [REF].
See above under "Literary revision" and "Comedy" the many tributes to Alice.
Zelazny refers in passing to B. Traven, a mysterious German novelist who lived most of his life in Mexico.
A "brace of roods" does not describe two crosses in Doorways, but rather a double cross [REF].
Fred says he does not want to remain a "Spiegelmensch" (a mirror man) very long.
Hilbert space is a mathematical concept that is about the conversion of 2-dimensional space to spaces with more than two or three dimensions [REF].
When going to sleep Fred says, "'Let there be an end to thought.
(1975 June) Analog Science Fiction/Science Fact.
(1975 July) Analog Science Fiction/Science Fact.
(1975 August) Analog Science Fiction/Science Fact.
Zelazny mixes other genres into his science fiction and fantasy works.
Doorways is a science fiction novel with mystery and comic elements that evokes[REF] and offers homage[REF] to Lewis Carroll's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, Through the Looking-Glass, and The Hunting of the Snark; and to notes by Martin Gardner in The Annotated Alice.
Doorways is also detective fiction.
While Doorways is clearly not a fantasy novel, it is necessary to understand the differences between fantasy and science fiction since Zelazny converts elements of one into elements of the other.
Consistent rules of magic [REF].
Doorways shares none of these characteristics.
Zelazny laces many of his works with humor, but with Doorways he set out to write a truly comedic novel [REF].
"In which order?" O bless this house, by all means, first.
"Bless," I said, stepping in [REF].
Here he satirizes some silly practices of bureaucracies with some double-talk.
"I am not permitted to say" He cut short a snappy rejoinder by pouring more water down my throat.
"However, since it is all contingent on the results of the analysis, it would be an exercise in redundancy to detail the various hypotheses which may have to be discarded."
In Doorways as in The Courts of Chaos the evocations of and homage to Lewis Carroll's works provide many of the gags and mad humor.
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and Doorways begin on warm May afternoons.
Morton Zeemeister and Jamie Buckler are sadistic versions of the Walrus and the Carpenter.
Ralph Warp, Fred's partner in the crafts store, Warp and Woof, is described as having bad posture and lots of dark hair.
Throughout the story Fred is haunted by a phantom smile, perhaps telepathic touches of the Whillowhim, his evil alien nemesis.
"Our snark is a Boojum."[REF]
Zelazny writes a nonsense poem that uses the non-Euclidean geometry of Nikolai Lobachevsky and Bernhard Riemann to extol the curved features of the female form [REF].
One device used in Doorways is reversed writing, a result of Fred's reversal through the Rhennius machine.
Alice talks to many different creatures in her walks through Wonderland.
The setting is in the "near-future Earth."[REF]
Add air scooters and flycars and that completes the near future in Doorways.
The action takes place mostly in the United States at an unnamed university in an unnamed city near an unnamed ocean.
Zelazny has been repeatedly referred to as a prose-poet [REF].
Geis writes that Doorways "is written with the Zelazny magic; that indefinable stylistic touch that makes him extremely readable."[REF]
Cowper writes that Zelaznyhas fashioned for himself a style which . . is designed to dazzle.
Sturgeon praises him for his "texture, cadence and pace."[REF] .
Lindskold asserts that "In the final analysis . .
Lindskold adds as elements of poetic diction alliteration, internal rhyme, and metaphor to form, image, and structure [REF].
In Doorways, with the exception of Speicus' narration in the last chapter (See text box.),
"Do you hear me, Fred?"-the twilight velvet.
"Closer, closer, that not a sound betray .
Some reviewers expressed disappointment not only in Doorways, but in Zelazny's previous recent work as well.
Spider Robinson in Galaxy Science Fiction Magazine stated that Zelazny's initial works gave the science fiction world hope that he would write "muscular adventure in the language of the poet, uniting drama and beauty," but he had failed.
Richard E. Geis in Science Fiction Review wrote that "at the end I was left vaguely unsatisfied," but the novel had "Zelazny magic; that indefinable stylistic touch that makes him extremely readable."[REF] .
Locus magazine's Susan Wood wondered if Zelazny's "promise would ever be fulfilled."
Nonetheless, he rated Doorways as "definitely superior." .
On the other hand, Algis Budrys in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction wrote that Doorways "is one of the first hopeful signs from this author in some time" and "a return toward the power Zelazny once displayed, plus a maturation that runs deeper than witticism."
Doorways in the Sand has had five English editions with separate ISBN numbers, the last in 1991, and has been translated into German, Bulgarian, Dutch, Russian, Hebrew, Japanese, French, Italian, and Polish.
Germany announced that its commercial trade agreement with the United States was terminated due to Mayor La Guardia's actions.
A munitions factory in Taíno, Lombardy, Italy exploded, killing 33 [REF].
The Federal Writers' Project was established in the United States [REF].
Near Linz, Austrian Chancellor Kurt Schuschnigg was injured in an auto accident that killed his wife.
Much of Austria's Habsburg Law was lifted, including the provision that banned certain Hapsburgs from entering the country [REF].
The United States and the Soviet Union signed a $30 million economic pact [REF].
Doc Cramer of the Philadelphia Athletics went 6-for-6 in a game.
British Foreign Secretary Samuel Hoare announced that the government would not allow British manufacturers to export war materiel to either Ethiopia or Italy until all efforts to resolve the Abyssinia Crisis were exhausted.
All Jewish tourists were driven out of the German seaside resort town of Misdroy [REF].
Heavy rains left 70% of the Chinese province of Hubei flooded [REF].
Yugoslavia and the Vatican signed a concordat placing the Catholic Church on an equal basis with Eastern Orthodoxy [REF].
A League of Nations-sponsored conference began in Buenos Aires to negotiate a peace treaty to end the Chaco War [REF].
Anthony Eden gave his report to the House of Commons on the failed Rome conference with Mussolini.
Participants in the On-to-Ottawa Trek clashed with police in Regina, Saskatchewan, resulting in the death of 1 officer, 45 injuries and 130 arrests.
Belgium diplomatically recognized the Soviet Union [REF].
Seven were killed in Belfast during clashes between members of the Orange Order and Irish nationalists [REF].
The crime-drama film The Murder Man starring Spencer Tracy and Virginia Bruce was released.
The Merian C. Cooper-produced and Irving Pichel-directed fantasy adventure film She was released.
At New York Harbor, hundreds of communist demonstrators stormed the SS Bremen, tore the Nazi swastika flag from the foremast and threw it into the Hudson River [REF].
A staff member of the office of German sports commissioner Hans von Tschammer und Osten said that no Jews would represent Germany at next year's Berlin Olympics.
The Stahlhelm were dissolved in Prussia [REF].
The musical film Curly Top was released.
Nazis attacked Jews along the Kurfürstendamm in Berlin [REF].
A mining disaster in Lengede, Germany killed 10 and injured 30 [REF].
The Vatican newspaper L'Osservatore Romano strongly attacked Nazi Germany for failing to uphold the Reichskonkordat with the Catholic church [REF].
U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the National Labor Relations Act, guaranteeing the rights of private sector employees to organize into trade unions [REF].
Elisabeth of Romania obtained a divorce from the former King George II of Greece [REF].
Helen Wills Moody defeated fellow American Helen Jacobs in the Ladies' Singles Final at Wimbledon [REF].
The wireless antenna of Benito Mussolini's plane was struck by lightning as it landed in Salerno, but Mussolini was unharmed.
The American Legion told all U.S. citizens to leave Ethiopia [REF].
37 died in flooding in New York State [REF].
The Reich Ministry of Education decreed that all students were required to prove they were of "Aryan descent" before admission to German universities [REF].
The third Major League Baseball All-Star Game was played at Cleveland Stadium in Cleveland, Ohio.
An African-American man accused of attacking a white woman was lynched by a white mob in Fort Lauderdale, Florida [REF].
Wolf-Heinrich Graf von Helldorf was made Berlin's chief of police [REF].
Crowds in the Place de l'Opéra in Paris fought thousands of police and guards during demonstrations against nationwide pay reductions [REF].
The United States delivered a curt reply to Ethiopia's request, saying the mediation being conducted by the League of Nations still had a chance to reach a satisfactory conclusion [REF].
Nazi Germany passed a new law making draft dodging liable to six months imprisonment and fines.
Fred Perry of the United Kingdom defeated Gottfried von Cramm of Germany in the Gentlemen's Singles Final at Wimbledon [REF].
The Parliament of Canada established the Canadian Wheat Board.
Two days after being released by the Chicago Cubs, outfielder Kiki Cuyler signed as a free agent with the Cincinnati Reds [REF].
Mridangam or tannumai in Tamil (wooden double-headed drum) - Nandi is said to have played the mridangam during Shiva's primordial tandava dance, causing a divine rhythm to resound across the heavens.
Panchajanya - a Shankha conch shell of the Hindu god Vishnu.
Shankha - A conch shell which is of ritual and religious importance in both Hinduism and Buddhism.
Venu - The venu (a bamboo transverse flute) is associated with Krishna, who is often depicted playing it.
Yogesha Nadam - The conch of Lord Shiva.
Saraswati veena - The veena of Saraswati, Hindu goddess of knowledge, music, arts, wisdom and learning.
Rudra veena - As Rudra is a name for the Hindu god Shiva, rudra vina literally means "the veena dear to Shiva".
Amrita - The nectar produced from the Samudra manthan, which upon consuming, granted the gods immortality.
Halahala (also called 'kalakuta') - The Samudra manthan process released a number of things from the Ocean of Milk.
Soma (Sanskrit) or Haoma (Avestan) - It is described as being prepared by extracting juice from the stalks of a certain plant.
Keyur - Keyur is the golden jewellery, worn by Krishna on his arm (armlet), over the biceps.
Kiriti - The celestial diadem, presented by Indra to Arjuna.
Makarakundala - Makara shaped ear-rings are sometimes worn by the Hindu gods, for example Shiva, the Destroyer, or the Preserver-god Vishnu, the Sun god Surya, and the Mother Goddess Chandi.
Shiva Kundala - The Hindu God Shiva wears two earrings or Kundalas.
Garland of ever-fresh lotuses - Amba performed austerities and pleased Kartikeya, the god of war.
Mundamala (also called Kapalamala or Rundamala) - The mundamala is a garland of severed human heads and/or skulls.
Vaijayanti-mala - Literally meaning, "the garland of victory".
Kirita-makuta (tall conical crown) - The crown of Vishnu, Vaishnavi, Indrani.
Ratna mukuta (jewelled crown) - The crown of Ganesha, remover of obstacles.
Kaustubha - Is a divine jewel or "Mani", which is in the possession of Lord Vishnu.
Nagamani - The gem that lies on the nagaraja Vasuki's head.
Syamantaka (also Syamantakamani and Shyamantaka Jewel) - The most famous jewel that is supposed to be blessed with magical powers [REF].
Ashtamangala - The Aṣṭamaṅgala are a sacred suite of Eight Auspicious Symbols.
Chhatra - An umbrella, according to Hindu mythology, is the emblem of Varuna.
Hiranyagarbha (World egg) - The source of the creation of the universe or the manifested.
Prana - All the cosmic energy, permeating the Universe on all levels.
Rama Setu In the Ramayana, the vanaras named Nala and Nila construct a floating bridge(known as Rama Setu) across the sea, using stones that floated on water because they had Rama's name written on them.
Rudraksha, also rudraksh, ("Rudra's/Shiva's Teardrops"), is a seed traditionally used for prayer beads in Hinduism.
Stambha (also spelled as Skambha) - In the context of Hindu mythology, is believed to be a cosmic column.
Vedic amulet - In Vedic literature, fig trees often represent talismans with the udumbara fig tree having been deemed the "lord of amulets".
Wheel of time or wheel of history (also known as Kalachakra) is a concept found in several religious traditions and philosophies, notably religions of Indian origin such as Hinduism, Sikhism, and Buddhism, which regard time as cyclical and consisting of repeating ages.
Ankusha (also Elephant Goad) - An elephant goad is one of the eight auspicious objects known as Astamangala.
Aruval - Tamils revere the weapon, a type of billhook, as a symbol of Karupannar.
Chentu - A horse whip which looks like a crooked stick, and is a typical attribute of Aiyanar, Krishna in his aspect as Rajagopala, and Shiva with Nandi.
Indra's dart (also Vasavi Shakti) - Vasavi Shakti was used by Karna against Ghatotkacha in the Mahabharata war.
Indra's net - The net was one of the weapons of the sky-god Indra, used to snare and entangle enemies.
Samvartak - The Halayudha, (also called Balachita), is a plough used as a weapon by Balaram, brother of Krishna.
Shiva Kaakam - An unconquerable weapon of Lord Shiva.
Agneyastra - The weapon discharged would emit flames inextinguishable through normal means.
Brahmanda Astra - It is said in the epic Mahabharata that the weapn manifests with the all five heads of Lord Brahma as its tip.
Brahmashirsha Astra - It is thought that the Brahmashirsha Astra is the evolution of the Brahmastra, and 4 times stronger than Brahmastra.
Brahmastra - Described in a number of the Puranas, it was considered the deadliest weapon.
Indraastra - Would bring about a rain of arrows from the sky.
Narayanastra - The personal missile of Vishnu in his Narayana or Naraina form.
Pashupatastra - An irresistible and most destructive personal weapon of Shiva and Kali, discharged by the mind, the eyes, words, or a bow.
Vaishnavastra - In the Mahabharatha, on the 12th day of the war, Bhagadatta fired an irresistible weapon called Vaishnavastra on Arjuna, but Arjuna was saved from death by Krishna.
Varunastra - A water weapon (a storm) according to the Indian scriptures, incepted by Varuna.
Maheshwara Chakra - The Chakra of Lord Shiva.
Sudarshana Chakra - The legendary discus of Vishnu, which cannot be stopped by anyone, except by Lord Vishnu and Lord Shiva.
Brahmadanda - The rod of Brahma (also known as Meru-danda).
Kaladanda - the staff of Death is a special and lethal club used by the God Yama or God of Naraka or Hell in Hindu mythology.
Khaṭvāṅga - In Hinduism, the god Shiva - Rudra carried the khatvāṅga as a staff weapon and are thus referred to as khatvāṅgīs.
Arrow of Brahma - The arrow given by the sage Agastya to Rama (seventh avatar of Vishnu) and was used to kill Ravana.
Arrow of Shiva - It can destroy creation.
Bow of Kama - The bow of Kama, god of love, made of sugarcane with a string of honeybees and with arrows decorated with five kinds of fragrant flowers.
Indra's bow (also Vijaya Dhanush) - Parasurama gave Vijaya to his student Karna, one of the greatest hero of the Hindu epic Mahabharata.
Kaundinya's bow - A magic bow wielded by the Brahman Kaundinya I, who used it to make the Nāga princess Soma fall in love with him.
Pinaka (Shiva's bow) - The great bow of Shiva, arrows fired from the bow could not be intercepted.
Teen Baan - Shiva gave Barbarika three infallible arrows (Teen Baan).
Ekasha Gada - The mace of Lord Shiva.
Gada - the main weapon of the Hindu monkey god Hanuman, son of Añjanā.
Saunanda - The mushala, a cylidrical rod (weapon) of Balaram.
Shibika (a club) - The weapon of Kubera, god of wealth.
Asi (also Sword of Drona) - a legendary sword in Hinduism.
Chandrahas - Sword of Ravana granted by Maha Shiva as a boon.
Girish - A special sword of Shiva with unique characteristics.
Khanda - The khanda is a symbol of Shiva.
Nandaka - Is the sword of the Hindu god, Vishnu.
Nistrimsha - The sword of Pradyumna, son of Krishna.
Pattayudha - The divine sword of Lord Virabhadra, commander of Lord Shiva's Armies.
Parashu - The parashu is an Indian battle-axe.
Tanka - The axe of Indra, God of thunder.
Dharma Paasha - The pasha of Lord Dharma.
Ganesha Paasha - The pasha of Ganesha.
Kaala Paasha - The pasha of Time.
Naga Pasha - Pasha of The Nagas.
Shiva Parham - A long noose (of Shiva) from which even the Gods can't escape from.
Varuna paasha - Pasha of Varuna, god of water.
Yama Paasha - Pasha of Yama, god of death.
Jayantha Vel - A spear which contains the power of the third eye of Lord Shiva.
Trident of Madhu - It was given as a boon by Shiva to Madhu, a Rakshasa.
Trishula - The trident of Shiva, stylized by some as used as a missile weapon and often included a crossed stabilizer to facilitate flight when thrown.
Vel - Vel is a divine javelin (spear) associated with the Hindu war god Karthikeya.
Eraká grass - The grass that grew from the cast away powdered iron-bolt belonging to Samba.
Kusha grass/Darbha grass - The Kusha grass is specifically recommended by Lord Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita as part of the ideal seat for meditation.
Padma - Padma (The sacred lotus) is an aquatic plant that plays a central role in Indian religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, and Jainism.
Saugandhika flower was a lotus flower which was sought after by Bhima (for Draupadi) during the Pandavas exile.
Sanjeevani - Sanjeevani is a magical herb which has the power to cure any malady.
Tulsi - Tulsi (or Tulasi, Holy basil) is a sacred plant in Hindu belief.
Nandana is the celestial garden in Amaravati (also known as Indra Loka), planted with sacred trees and sweet-scented flowers.
Sacred grove - A sacred grove or sacred woods are any grove of trees that are of special religious importance.
Ashoka tree - The ashoka tree is closely associated with the yakshi mythological beings.
Bilva tree - Bilwa tree is a sacred tree and used to worship Lord Shiva.
Kadamba - The kadamba is mentioned in the Bhagavata Purana.
Parijata - The divine flowering tree with blossoms that never fade or wilt - taken to Indraloka by the Devas.
Sala tree - In Hindu tradition, the sal tree is said to be favoured by Vishnu.
Navaratna - The sacred and royal "nine gems".
Nidhi (also called Nidhana, Nikhara, and Sevadhi) - In Hindu mythology, Nidhi, that is, a treasure, constitutes of nine treasures (nawanidhi) belonging to Kubera, god of wealth.
Ratnas - The 14 gems/treasures produced during the Samudra manthan.
Kalasha - The kalasha is considered a symbol of abundance and "source of life" in the Vedas.
Kamandalu or kamandal or kamandalam - It is an oblong water pot made of a dry gourd (pumpkin) or coconut shell, metal, wood of the Kamandalataru tree,[REF] or from clay, usually with a handle and sometimes with a spout.
Kapala - A kapala (Sanskrit for "skull") or skullcup is a cup made from a human skull used as a ritual implement (bowl) in both Hindu and Buddhist Tantra.
Kumbha - A kumbha is a type of pottery in India.
Garuda Dhwaja - The flag of Vishnu.
Indra Dhwaja - The flag of Indra.
Kakkai kodi - The flag of Jyestha, goddess of inauspicious things and misfortune.
Kapi Dhwaja or Vanara dwaja (monkey flag) - The flag of Arjuna in the Mahabharata, in which the Lord Hanuman himself resided [REF].
Makaradhvaja - The flag of Kama, god of love.
Seval Kodi - The war flag of Lord Murugan, god of war.
Surya's chariot - The chariot of Surya, charioteered by Aruna and drawn by seven horses.
Vitthakalai - A gold-decorated chariot of Kali.
Pushpa Vimana - (An Aeroplane with flowers) is a mythical Aeroplane found in Ayyavazhi mythology.
Pushpaka Vimana or Dandu Monara - Pushpaka was originally made by Vishwakarma for Brahma, the Hindu god of creation; later Brahma gave it to Kubera, the God of wealth; but it was later stolen, along with Lanka, by his half-brother, king Ravana.
Tripurajit Vimana - The golden vimana which Lord Shiva uses.
Cooling the reactors with recirculated and decontaminated water from the basements proved to be a success, but as a consequence, this radioactive waste was piling up in the temporary storage facility at the plant.
On 27 September after three months operation some 4,700 drums with radioactive waste had piled up at the plant.
According to Professor Akio Koyama of the Kyoto University Research Reactor Institute, the density of high-level decontaminated water was believed to contain some 10 billion becquerels per liter, but if this is condensed to polluted sludge and zeolites, this density could increase 10,000 fold.
On August 16, 2011, TEPCO announced the installation of devices in the fuel-pools of reactor 2, 3 and 4, which used special membranes and electricity to desalinate the water.
Since the disaster, TEPCO has installed sensors, a fabric cover over the reactors and additional filters to reduce the emission of contaminants.
After the detection of radioactive xenon gas in the containment vessel of the No. 2 reactor on 1 and 2 November 2011 TEPCO was not able to determine whether this was a sustained fission process or only spontaneous fission.
On 20 September the Japanese government and TEPCO announced the installation of new filters to reduce the amount of radioactive substances released into the air.
An effort has been undertaken to fit the three damaged reactor buildings with fabric covers and filters to limit radioactive contamination release [REF].
In June 2016, preparation work began to install a metal cover over the Unit 3 reactor building.
On 19 January 2012 the interior of the primary containment vessel of reactor 2 was inspected with an industrial endoscope.
On 14 March 2012 for the first time after the accidents six workers were sent into the basements of reactor no. 2 and 3, to examine the suppression chambers.
On 26 and 27 March 2012 the inside of the containment vessel of reactor 2 was inspected with a 20 meter long endoscope.
Japanese reactor maker Toshiba said it could decommission the earthquake-damaged Fukushima nuclear power plant in about 10 years, a third quicker than the American Three Mile Island plant [REF].
TEPCO announced it restored the automated cooling systems in the damaged reactors in about three months, and had the reactors put into cold shutdown status in six months [REF].
First estimates included costs as high as (), as cited by the Japanese Prime Minister at the time, Yoshihiko Noda (野田 佳彦).
Japan's economy, trade, and industry ministry recently () estimated the total cost of dealing with the Fukushima disaster at (), more than twice the previous estimate of ().
Because the monsoon season begins in June in Japan, it became urgent to protect the damaged reactor building from storms, typhoon and heavy rainfall.
On 7 September 2011 TEPCO president Toshio Nishizawa said, that the 4 damaged reactors will be scrapped.
On 28 October 2011 the Atomic Energy Commission of Japan presented a timetable in a draft report, how to scrap the Fukushima reactors.
This scheme was partly based on the experience with the 1979 Three Mile Island accident, however in Fukushima with three meltdowns at one site the damage was much more extensive.
Significant efforts are being taken to clean up radioactive material that escaped the plant.
There is also a concern that washing surfaces will merely move the radioactive material without eliminating it [REF].
After an earlier decontamination-plan only to clean all areas with radiation levels above 5 millisievert per year, had raised protests, the Japanese government revealed, on 10 October 2011, in a meeting with experts, a revised decontamination plan.
no-entry zones and evacuation zones designated by the government would be the responsibility of the government.
the rest of the areas would be cleaned by local authorities.
in areas with radiation levels above 20 millisievert per year, decontamination would be done step by step.
In a Reuters story from August 2013, it was noted "[m]any have given up hope of ever returning to live in the shadow of the Fukushima nuclear plant.
On 22 February 2012 TEPCO started cementing the seabed near the plant to prevent the spread of radioactive materials into the sea.
Decontamination efforts were planned in line with this newly designed order, to help the people to return to places where the radiation levels would be relatively low [REF].
Mid December 2011 the local authorities in Fukushima had spent already around 1.7 billion yen (21 million$) on the costs of decontamination-works in the cities of Fukushima and Date and the village of Kawauchi.
In 2016, University of Oxford researcher and author Peter Wynn Kirby wrote that the government had allocated the equivalent of US$15 billion for the regional cleanup and described the josen (decontamination) process, with "provisional storage areas (kari-kari-okiba) .. [and] more secure, though still temporary, storage depots (kari-okiba)".
Continued cooling of the melted reactor cores is required in order to remove excess heat.
The Japanese government had initially requested the assistance of the Russian floating water decontamination plant Landysh to process the radioactive water from the damaged reactors, but negotiations with the Russian government were a extremely slow process and it is unclear if the plant was ever sent to Fukushima.
As of early September 2011 the operating rate of the filtering system exceeded the target of 90 percent for the first time.
In order to remove decay heat of the severe damaged cores of Unit 1-3, TEPCO injected cooling water into the reactors.
As the accumulated water in the basement (see the tunnel below diagram #2) of the turbine building of Units 2 and 3 was radioactive, TEPCO needed to remove it.
The Fukushima Daiichi NPS has several seawater piping trenches which were originally designed to house pipes and cables running from the Unit 2-4 turbine buildings to their seaside, which doesn't directly connect to the sea.
On 5 July 2013, TEPCO found 9,000 Bq/L of 134Cs and 18,000 Bq/L of 137Cs in a sample taken from a monitoring well close to the coastline.
More than a month after the groundwater contamination was discovered, TEPCO started to contain the radioactive groundwater.
In January 2014 it was made public that a total of 875 trillion becquerel (Bq) of tritium are on the site of Fukushima Daiichi
At the time of the initial event, 50 TEPCO employees remained onsite in the immediate aftermath to work to stabilize the plant and begin cleanup [REF].
Initially, TEPCO did not put forward a strategy to regain control of the situation in the reactors.
Cold shutdown was accomplished on December 11, 2011.
On 5 May 2011, workers were able to enter reactor buildings for the first time since the accident [REF].
There has been concern that the plant would be dangerous for workers.
The disaster in Fukushima has revealed the practice of Japanese nuclear power plants systematically using unskilled laborers with short contracts.
Two shelters for people working at the Fukushima-site were not listed as part of the radiation management zones although radiation levels in the shelters exceeded the legal limits.
General Douglas MacArthur, 81, returned to the Philippines for the first time since the end of World War II, and received a tumultuous welcome.
Major General Park Chung Hee forced the resignation of Korean leader Chang Do-Young and became chief of the military junta that had taken over in May.
As a result of the lobbying of Dr. Harold Griffith, the Queen Elizabeth Hospital of Montreal opened the first intensive care unit in Canada [REF].
The Stage première of the opera Krapp, ou, La dernière bande (Krapp's Last Tape) by Marcel Mihalovici with libretto by Samuel Beckett, took place at the Théâtre des Nations in Paris.
Malcolm Arnold conducted the first performance of his Symphony No. 5 at the Cheltenham Music Festival.
Invoking the Taft-Hartley Act, an U.S. federal court ordered a temporary halt to the 19-day-old, nationwide maritime strike that had held up freight shipping [REF].
In Pakistan, President Ayub Khan promulgated the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance of 1961 to supersede traditional Sunni and Shia Muslim law practices concerning marriage, divorce, and inheritance.
William A. Fitzgerald, alias Nathan Boya, became the fifth person known to have ridden over Niagara Falls and survived.
Elections were held in the Australian state of Victoria to elect the 66 members of the state's Legislative Assembly and 17 members of the 34-member Legislative Council.
The 1961 British Grand Prix at Aintree was won by Wolfgang von Trips.
The first regularly scheduled in-flight movie service began, as a TWA flight from New York to Los Angeles showed By Love Possessed to its first class customers [REF].
An Aerolíneas Argentinas DC-6 airplane crashed while flying from Buenos Aires to Comodoro Rivadavia, killing all 67 persons on board.
The USS Theodore Roosevelt (SSBN-600) began its first deterrent patrol, loaded with Polaris missiles.
The first moves were made in the formation of the NATO Tiger Association.
At the request of the Emir of Kuwait, 7,000 British troops and 1,200 Saudi troops arrived to protect the small nation against a possible invasion by Iraq [REF].
The Dowry Prohibition Act went into effect in India, prohibiting the solicitation or payment of money from one family to another as consideration for a marriage [REF].
Fantasy Island, a theme park on Grand Island near Buffalo, New York opened [REF].
Ana Griselda Vegas of Caracas was crowned Miss Venezuela 1961.
Martha Helen Kostyra, 19, married Andrew Stewart in New York City.
The TIROS-3 satellite was launched from Florida, and the MIDAS-3 satellite was fired into orbit from California [REF].
A Czechoslovakian Airlines Ilyushin-18 turboprop airplane crashed while attempting to make a landing in Casablanca, Morocco, killing all 72 persons on board.
Lech Walesa, 17, began working at the Lenin Shipyard in Gdańsk, Poland.
Mario Jascalevich was granted his medical license by the state of New Jersey.
A dam at Panshet in India the burst, causing massive flooding in the city of Pune.
Eight people were killed when lightning struck a tobacco curing barn in Clinton, North Carolina, where they had taken shelter from a storm.
An alleged "unexplained incident" is said to have occurred in Shreveport, Louisiana, when peaches "fell from the sky" on a group of carpenters roofing a house.
The first Ohrid Summer Festival opened in Macedonia.
The Voynich manuscript was sold for the last time, to bookdealer Hans Kraus for $24,500.
In Moscow, North Korea and the Soviet Union signed a "Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance", providing that if one of the nations was in a state of war, the other one would extend military assistance.
Morocco signed a treaty with Algerian rebels led by Ferhat Abbas, pledging support for the independence movement against France, and agreeing that any further negotiations on the border between the two nations would be made after independence [REF].
Scott LaFaro, 25, American jazz bassist who was 1/3rd of the Bill Evans Trio, in an auto accident near Avon, New York .
A series of explosions of the Portuguese ship Save killed 237 people on board, after running aground on a sandbar in Mozambique [REF].
The United Klans of America was created by the merger of several different racist groups meeting at Indian Springs, Georgia, seeking a revival of the Ku Klux Klan.
No Briton had won the women's championship at Wimbledon in 24 years, but in an all-British final, Angela Mortimer beat Christine Truman, 4-6, 6-4 and 7-5 [REF].
Dissatisfied with life in the Soviet Union, American defector Lee Harvey Oswald flew from Minsk to Moscow, then went to the American Embassy to ask for the return of his U.S. Passport, #1733242.
The Economic Planning Board (EPB) was created by order of South Korean dictator Park Chung Hee, to implement the goals of the Comprehensive Economic Development Five-Year Plan, drafted by three young economists (Kim Song Bom, 37; Paek Yong Chan, 32; and Chong So Yong, 29).
The British government agreed to pay the government of San Marino the sum of 732,000,000 Italian lira (80,000 British pounds, or at the time US $224,000) as compensation for the erroneous bombing of the republic on June 26, 1944, during a British raid on Italy [REF].
The Roman Catholic Diocese of Tilarán and the Roman Catholic Diocese of Huehuetenango were erected.
Meeting in Cairo, the Council of the Arab League voted to admit Kuwait as its 11th member nation, and to send troops to replace the British in protecting the newly independent state from annexation by Iraq.
Three years after Egypt and Syria had merged their governments to form the United Arab Republic, with Egypt's Gamal Abdel Nasser as President, Nasser nationalized Syria's banks, insurance companies, and other private businesses.
After two years of living and working in Minsk, American defector Lee Harvey Oswald applied to the Soviet Union for an exit visa so that he could return to the United States.
What is now the Barzilai Medical Center opened at Ashkelon, Israel, and is named for Yisrael Barzilai.
Hurricane Anna formed in the Atlantic.
In a secret meeting with Soviet nuclear scientists, Nikita Khrushchev announced his decision to resume nuclear testing and to end the moratorium that the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. had observed since 1958.
Mildred Gillars, nicknamed "Axis Sally", was released from the women's federal prison in Alderson, West Virginia, after serving 12 years of a sentence for treason.
The German Banking Act was passed, creating a federal bank regulating agency, the Bundesaufsichtsamt für das Kreditwesen (Federal Bank Supervisory Office) [REF].
The islands of Wallis and Futuna, located in the South Pacific Ocean, were accepted as "an integral part of the French Republic" in the form of a single French overseas territory [REF].
Using an IBM 7090 computer, researchers Daniel Shanks and John W. Wrench, Jr., were able to calculate the value of pi to 100,000 digits for the first time.
Country music singer Patsy Cline sang at a concert in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and a recording was made of the live performance.
KGB Director Alexander Shelepin presented to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev the outline for a plan to combat "The Main Adversary", the euphemism for the United States.
The IBM Selectric typewriter was placed on the market by International Business Machines.
At Fenway Park in Boston, Massachusetts, the first All-Star Game tie in Major League Baseball history occurred.
Ireland submitted its first ever application to join the then European Economic Community.
Jerry Barber won the 1961 PGA Championship at Olympia Fields near Chicago, beating Don January by a single stroke (67 to 68) after the two were forced into a playoff [REF].
The Government of India encourages foreign investment in the automobile sector and allows 100 per cent FDI under the automatic route.
In the Union budget of 2015-16, the Government has announced plans to provide credit of Rs 850,000 crore (US$127.5 billion) to farmers, which is expected to boost sales in the tractors segment.
The government plans to promote eco-friendly cars in the country-i.e.
The government has formulated a Scheme for Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Electric and Hybrid Vehicles in India, under the National Electric Mobility Mission 2020, to encourage the progressive introduction of reliable, affordable, and efficient electric and hybrid vehicles into the country.
The Automobile Mission Plan (AMP) for the period 2006-2016, designed by the government is aimed at accelerating and sustaining growth in this sector.
This list is of cars that are officially available and serviced in India.
Hyundai, Suzuki, BMW, Volkswagen, Audi, Mercedes Benz, Ford, Fiat, Honda, Chevrolet (of General Motors), Toyota, Lamborghini, Jaguar, and Skoda are the foreign automotive companies that manufacture and market their products in India.
Opel was present in India until 2006.
Ashok Leyland[REF] - originally a JV between Ashok Motors (owned by the Hinduja Group) and Leyland Motors, now joint ventures between Ashok Leyland and Nissan Motors (Japan) for LCV's; and John Deere (USA) for construction equipment [REF].
Tatra Vectra Motors Ltd - (defunct) Initial truck partnership with India by Vectra.
VE Commercial Vehicles Limited[REF] - VE Commercial Vehicles limited - A JV between Volvo Group and Eicher Motors Limited.
Maruti Suzuki - A joint venture of Indian Maruti and Japanese Suzuki.
J. C. Bamford (JCB) (Owned by British multinational corporation J. C. Bamford).
The majority of India's car manufacturing industry is evenly divided into three "clusters".
Near Mumbai, Maharashtra, along the Chakan corridor near Pune, is the western cluster, with a 33% share of the market.
The northern cluster is around the National Capital Region, and contributes 32%.
An emerging cluster is the state of Gujarat, with a manufacturing facility of General Motors in Halol, and a facility for Tata Nano at their plant in Sanand.
Kolkata with Hindustan Motors (inactive), Noida with Honda, and Bengaluru with Toyota are other automotive manufacturing regions around the country [REF].
Maruti Suzuki - Ahmedabad .
Hyundai Construction Equipment - Chakan (Pune).
Sonalika Tractor Pvt Ltd, Hoshiarpur.
In order to keep up with the growing demand, several auto makers have started investing heavily in various segments of the industry during the last few months.
The world's largest air bag suppliers Autoliv Inc, Takata Corp, TRW Automotive Inc and Toyoda Gosei Co are setting up plants and increasing capacity in India.
General Motors plans to invest US$1 billion in India by 2020, mainly to increase the capacity at the Talegaon plant in Maharashtra from 130,000 units a year to 220,000 by 2025.
US-based car maker Chrysler has planned to invest Rs 3,500 crore (US$525 million) in Maharashtra, to manufacture Jeep Grand Cherokee model.
Mercedes Benz has decided to manufacture the GLA entry SUV in India.
Germany-based luxury car maker Bayerische Motoren Werke AG's (BMW) local unit has announced to procure components from seven India-based auto parts makers.
Mahindra Two Wheelers Limited (MTWL) acquired 51 per cent shares in France-based Peugeot Motorcycles (PMTC) [REF].
Automobile Products of India or API - founded in 1949 at Bombay (now Mumbai), by the British company Rootes Group,[REF] and later bought over by M. A. Chidambaram of the MAC Group from Madras (now Chennai) [REF].
Escorts Yamaha - in 1984 Escorts formed a joint venture with Yamaha to manufacture motorcycles.
Hero Motors is a former moped and scooter manufacturer based in Delhi, India.
Ideal Jawa - motorcycle company based in Mysore, sold licensed Jawa and ČZ motorcycles beginning in 1960 under the brand name Jawa and later Yezdi.
Kinetic Honda - a joint venture between Kinetic Engineering Limited, India and Honda Motor Company, Japan.
Mopeds India Limited - produces the Suvega range of Mopeds under technical collaboration with Motobécane of France.
Standard - produced by Standard Motor Products in Madras from 1949 to 1988.
The industry produced a total 14.25 million vehicles including PVs, commercial vehicles (CVs), three wheelers (3W) and 2W in April-October 2015, as against 13.83 in April-October 2014, registering a marginal growth of 3.07 per cent, year-to-year.
The sales of PVs grew by 8.51 per cent in April-October 2015 over the same period in the previous year.
In April-October 2015, overall automobile exports grew by 5.78 per cent.
In 1897, the first car ran on an Indian road.
An embryonic automotive industry emerged in India in the 1940s.
In 1952, the government appointed the first Tariff Commission, one of whose purposes was to come out with a feasibility plan for the indigenization of the Indian automobile industry.
Premier Automobiles, Bombay - technical collaboration with Chrysler to manufacture Dodge, Plymouth and Desoto models and with Fiat to manufacture the 1100D models which would later with Premier Padmini range.
Standard Motor Products of India, Madras - technical collaboration from Standard-Triumph to manufacture Standard Vanguard, Standard 8, 10 and later Standard Herald.
Mahindra & Mahindra, Bombay - technical collaboration with Willys to manufacture CJ Series Jeep.
Bajaj Tempo, Poona now Force Motors - technical collaboration with Tempo (company) to manufacture Tempo Hanseat, a three-wheeler and Tempo Viking and Hanomag, later known as Tempo Matador in India.
Standard Motor Products of India - technical collaboration from Standard has licence to manufacture the Standard Atlas passenger van with panel van and one-tonne one tonne pickup variants.
Heavy Vehicles Factory - was established in 1965 in Avadi, near Chennai to produce tanks in India.
Tata Motors, Poona, then known as TELCO - technical collaboration with Mercedes Benz to manufacture medium to heavy commercial vehicles both Bus and Trucks.
Ashok Motors, later Ashok Leyland, Madras - technical collaboration with Leyland Motors to manufacture medium to heavy commercial vehicles both Bus and Trucks.
Hindustan Motors - technical collaboration with General Motors to manufacture the Bedford range of medium lorry and bus chassis.
Premier Automobiles - technical collaboration with Chrysler to manufacture the Dodge, Fargo range of medium lorry, panel vans, mini-bus and bus chassis.
Simpsons & Co, Madras - part of Amalgamations Group (TAFE Tractors)- technical collaboration with Ford to manufacture medium lorry and bus chassis, but did not utilise that option until the 1980s.
Royal Enfield (India), Madras - technical collaboration with Royal Enfield, UK to manufacture the Enfield Bullet range of motorcycles.
Bajaj Auto, Poona - technical collaboration with Piaggio, Italy to manufacture their best selling Vespa range of scooters and three wheelers with commercial option as well.
Automobile Products of India, Bombay (Better known for API Lambretta - technical collaboration with Innocenti of Milan, Italy to manufacture their Lambretta range of mopeds, scooters and three-wheelers.
Mopeds India Limited, Tirupathi - technical collaboration with Motobécane, France to manufacture their best selling Mobylette mopeds.
However, growth was relatively slow in the 1950s and 1960s, due to nationalisation and the license raj, hampered the growth of Indian private sector.
The beginning of the 1970s saw some growth potential and most of the collaboration license agreements came to an end but with option to continue manufacturing with renewed branding.
But after 1970, with restrictions on the import of vehicles set, the automotive industry started to grow; but the growth was mainly driven by tractors, commercial vehicles and scooters.
The OPEC oil crisis saw increase need to installing or redesign some vehicle to fit diesel engines on medium commercial vehicle.
From the end of the 1970s to the beginning of the 1980s saw no new models but the country continued with 2 decade old designs forcing government to encourage and let more manufacturers into fray.
In 1984, the then Prime Minister of India, Indira Gandhi established the Ordnance Factory Medak, near Hyderabad.
Eventually multinational automakers, such as, Suzuki and Toyota of Japan and Hyundai of South Korea, were allowed to invest in the Indian market, furthering the establishment of an automotive industry in India.
Exports were slow to grow.
In 2000, in line with international standards to reduce vehicular pollution, the central government unveiled standards titled "India 2000", with later, upgraded guidelines to be known as Bharat Stage emission standards.
India levies an import tax of 125% on electric cars, while the import tax on components such as gearboxes, airbags, drive axles, is 10%.
India's automobile exports have grown consistently and reached $4.5 billion in 2009, with the United Kingdom being India's largest export market, followed by Italy, Germany, Netherlands, and South Africa [REF].
According to the New York Times, India's strong engineering base and expertise in the manufacturing of low-cost, fuel-efficient cars has resulted in the expansion of manufacturing facilities of several automobile companies like Hyundai, Nissan, Toyota, Volkswagen, and Maruti Suzuki [REF].
In 2008, South Korean multinational Hyundai Motors alone exported 240,000 cars made in India.
In September 2009, Ford Motors announced its plans to set up a plant in India with an annual capacity of 250,000 cars, for US$500 million.
In 2009 India (0.23m) surpassed China (0.16m) as Asia's fourth largest exporter of cars after Japan (1.77m), Korea (1.12m) and Thailand (0.26m) [REF].
In July 2010, The Economic Times reported that PSA Peugeot Citroën was planning to re-enter the Indian market and open a production plant in Andhra Pradesh that would have an annual capacity of 100,000 vehicles, investing € 700M in the operation [REF].
In recent years, India has emerged as a leading center for the manufacture of small cars.
India exported $14.5 billion worth of automobiles in 2014.
The United States and Canada have seen an increase in the popularity of bacon and bacon-related recipes, dubbed "bacon mania".
Commentators explain this surging interest in bacon by reference to what they deem American cultural characteristics.
Alison Cook, writing in the Houston Chronicle, argues the case of bacon's American citizenship by referring to historical and geographical uses of bacon [REF].
On 1 February 2017, The Ohio Pork Council released a report that demand for pork belly (bacon) product is outpacing supply.
Bacon dishes include bacon and eggs, bacon, lettuce, and tomato (BLT) sandwiches, Cobb salad, and various bacon-wrapped foods, such as scallops, shrimp,[REF][REF][REF] and asparagus.
In the US and Europe, bacon is commonly used as a condiment or topping on other foods, often in the form of bacon bits.
Bacon is also used in adaptations of dishes; for example, bacon wrapped meatloaf,[REF] and can be mixed in with green beans[REF] or served sautéed over spinach.
Bacon is cured through either a process of injecting with or soaking in brine or using plain salt (dry curing) [REF].
In America, bacon is usually cured and smoked, and different flavours can be achieved by using various types of wood, or rarely corn cobs; peat is sometimes used in the United Kingdom.
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, smoked and unsmoked varieties are equally common, unsmoked being referred to as "green bacon" [REF].
Bacon is distinguished from salt pork and ham by differences in the brine or dry packing.
Bacon fat liquefies and becomes bacon dripping when it is heated.
If streaky pork belly bacon sliced in cubes is being used for lard preparation, as traditionally in Germany, the parts with higher melting temperatures are roasted and stay in the lard.
Bacon, or bacon fat, is often used for barding roast fowl and game birds, especially those that have little fat themselves.
One teaspoon () of bacon grease has 38 calories (40 kJ/g) [REF].
The popularity of bacon in the United States has given rise to a number of commercial products that promise to add bacon flavouring without the labour involved in cooking it or the perceived negative qualities of bacon.
Bacon bits are a frequently used topping on salad or potatoes, and a common element of salad bars [REF].
There is also a wide range of other bacon-flavoured products, including a bacon-flavoured salt (Bacon Salt),[REF][REF] Baconnaise (a bacon-flavoured mayonnaise),[REF][REF] Bacon Grill (a tinned meat, similar to Spam) and bacon ice cream.
Several alternatives to and substitutes for bacon have been developed for those who cannot or prefer not to eat standard pork bacon.
Turkey bacon is a popular alternative to bacon [REF].
The meat for turkey bacon comes from the whole turkey and can be cured or uncured, smoked, chopped, and reformed into strips that resemble bacon [REF].
Macon is another alternative to bacon, produced by curing cuts of mutton in a manner similar to the production of pork bacon [REF].
Vegetarian bacon, also referred to as fakon, veggie bacon, or vacon, is a product marketed as a bacon alternative that is available in supermarkets [REF].
Bacon has been gaining popularity over the past decade [REF].
Epic Meal Time, a cooking show based on YouTube, features bacon in many of their episodes.
On 29 May 2012, the YouTubers Rhett and Link published a comedy video promoting the topical application of bacon as a cure-all.
Side bacon, or streaky bacon, comes from pork belly [REF].
Pancetta is Italian streaky bacon, smoked or aqua (unsmoked), with a strong flavour [REF].
Back bacon contains meat from the loin in the middle of the back of the pig [REF].
Collar bacon is taken from the back of a pig near the head [REF].
Cottage bacon is thinly sliced lean pork meat from a shoulder cut that is typically oval shaped and meaty [REF].
Jowl bacon is cured and smoked cheeks of pork [REF].
Bacon has a large amount of sodium, and the consumption of a large amount of sodium has traditionally been considered to put a person at risk for heart disease and high blood pressure [REF].
Bacon is considered by many doctors to be unhealthy if eaten in excess [REF].
Researchers from the Harvard School of Public Health found in 2010 that eating processed meats (such as bacon) that are preserved by smoking, curing or salting, or with the addition of chemical preservatives, was associated with an increased risk of both heart disease and diabetes [REF].
A newly released publication about cancer research in the United Kingdom by the WHO says processed meats (like bacon or sausages) do cause cancer [REF].
Bacon is often served with eggs and sausages as part of a full breakfast [REF].
The most common form sold is 'middle bacon', which includes the more of the streaky, fatty section of side bacon along with a portion of the loin of back bacon.
An individual piece of bacon is a 'slice' or 'strip'.
Back bacon' refers to either smoked or unsmoked bacon cut from the boneless eye of pork loin
Peameal bacon is back bacon, brined and coated in fine cornmeal (historically, it was rolled in a meal made from ground dried peas) [REF].
Bacon is often eaten in breakfasts, such as with cooked eggs or pancakes.
Some of the meanings of bacon overlap with the German-language term Speck.
Small bacon cubes (called "Grieben" or "Grammerln" in Austria and southern Germany) have been a rather important ingredient of various southern German dishes.
In Japan, bacon (ベーコン)[REF] is pronounced "bēkon".
A thin slice of bacon is known as a 'rasher' [REF].
Bacon from the pork belly, with streaks of meat and fat, is referred to as 'streaky bacon'.
Bacon from the back of the pig is referred to as 'back bacon', and usually includes a streaky bit and a lean oval from the loin.
Middle cuts with an eye of meat and an extended streaky section are common.
Heavily trimmed back cuts which may consist of just the eye of meat are available.
Bacon may be cured in several ways
Fried or grilled[REF] bacon rashers are included in the traditional full breakfast, which varies slightly from country to country ("full Scottish", etc.).
A side of unsliced bacon is known as a 'slab' [REF].
American bacons include varieties smoked with hickory, mesquite or applewood and flavourings such as chili pepper, maple, brown sugar, honey, or molasses [REF].
The term 'bacon' on its own generally refers to strip bacon from the belly meat of the pig, which is the most popular type of bacon sold in the US.
Canadian Bacon' or 'Canadian-style bacon' is made from the pork loin,[REF] usually the lean ovoid portion (longissimus muscle or loineye) [REF].
On the Philippine island of Tinian, the Little Boy atomic bomb began being prepared for use [REF].
Japanese battleship Hyūga ran aground during the bombing of Kure and never returned to service.
Chinese forces entered Guilin [REF].
Ernest Bevin became the new UK Foreign Affairs Secretary.
Moscow radio announced that the body of Joseph Goebbels had been discovered in the courtyard of the Chancellery in Berlin [REF].
James F. Byrnes became United States Secretary of State.
The first civilian passenger car made in the United States in three years rolled off the assembly line of the Ford Motor Company in Detroit [REF].
At a press conference, Japanese Prime Minister Kantarō Suzuki gave a response to the Potsdam Declaration that elicited confusion.
American B-29s carried out the bombing of Aomori.
Japanese battleships Haruna and Ise and cruiser Ōyodo were sunk on the final day of the bombing of Kure.
The American destroyer Callaghan was sunk by a Yokosuka K5Y kamikaze attack off Okinawa.
The Potsdam Declaration was issued, outlining the Allied terms of surrender for the Empire of Japan.
The results of the United Kingdom general election were announced [REF].
Clement Attlee took office as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.
The Battle of Palikpapan began when Australian and Dutch troops made an amphibious landing a few miles north of Balikpapan, Borneo.
The Inner German Border was established as the boundary between the Western and Soviet occupation zones of Germany.
British troops withdrew from Magdeburg, now part of the Soviet occupation zone [REF].
A Lion is in the Streets by Adria Locke Langley topped the New York Times Fiction Best Sellers list.
Allied forces held a victory parade in Berlin [REF].
Norway announced that it had declared war on Japan on December 7, 1941 [REF].
Frank Forde became 15th Prime Minister of Australia one day after John Curtin's death in office.
MICHAEL I, King of Romania.
Italy declared war on Japan effective the next day [REF].
Japanese destroyer Tachibana was bombed and sunk in Hakodate Bay by U.S. Navy aircraft.
The Simla Conference on the future of Indian government ended in failure [REF].
The ban on Allied troops fraternizing with German women was lifted [REF].
Blackout restrictions for the West End of London were lifted [REF].
American vessels bombarded Muroran, the second-biggest steel center in Japan [REF].
Byron Nelson won the PGA Championship.
The Soviet Union agreed to hand over civilian and military control of West Berlin to British and U.S. forces [REF].
The Japanese destroyer Sakura struck a mine and sank in Osaka Harbor.
Fadil Hoxha became President of Kosovo.
The musical revue Sigh No More by Noël Coward opened at the Manchester Opera House.
The United Kingdom general election was held.
Frank Forde became Prime Minister of Australia when the incumbent John Curtin died in office.
The Polish Provisional Government of National Unity was recognized by Britain and the United States [REF].
The Potsdam Conference adjourned temporarily so the British delegation could return to England to hear the election results [REF].
The U.S. government announced the end of all organized Japanese resistance on Mindanao [REF].
Philippe Pétain caused an uproar when he spoke for the first time during his trial, claiming that he was deaf and had not heard a thing that had been said in court up to that time.
On Tinian, the assembly of the Little Boy atomic bomb was completed [REF].
The Ústí massacre of ethnic Germans in the northern Bohemian city of Ústí nad Labem occurred.
Pierre Laval was flown from Spain to Linz, Austria where he was handed over to French authorities [REF].
The steel industry continued to grow and finally consolidate through this period, some combining to form the Steel Company of Canada in 1910 and others Dominion Steel Casting Company in 1912.
The infant science of aviation found early and enthusiastic supporters in Hamilton.
Emigration continued from Britain and the United States (chiefly blacks) during this period as local museums show, but also began from other countries such as Italy and Austria-Hungary.
Increased population and prosperity prompted a building boom.
Hamiltonians participated in the First World War as combatants, but due to Col. Sir Sam Hughes' mobilization plans for the Canadian Expeditionary Force, there were no major battles associated purely with Hamiltonians.
Heavy industry boomed as the Canadian and British governments' war driven demands for steel, arms, munitions and textiles increased.
When the Dominion of Canada was created in 1867, Hamilton was an enthusiastic partner in the bold new political enterprise and preached the joys of the British Empire.
Growing commercial and industrial prosperity prompted large scale emigration from the British Isles.
More people meant more demand for services and information.
The Hamilton area was also intimately connected with the early history of the telephone.
More workers and new immigrants encouraged a nascent trade union movement among skilled craftsmen.
A more modest but still unstable railway boom marked the last part of the 19th century too.
The town of Hamilton was conceived by George Hamilton when he purchased the Durand farm shortly after the War of 1812 [REF].
Initially the Town of Hamilton was not the dominant center of the Gore District.
After simmering treaty and border disputes finally erupted into the War of 1812, the Hamilton area again became a strategic area.
George Hamilton, a settler and local politician, established a town site in the northern portion Barton Township after the war in 1815.
Gore Park, whose western boundary is King and James Streets, formed the public square for the new settlement and has remained the centre of the city ever since.
Gore District of Upper Canada and Wentworth County were created in 1816, with Mr. Hamilton's settlement as the seat for both.
During the first half of the 19th century, Mr. Hamilton's settlement in Barton Township steadily increased status at the expense of Dundas.
As railway fever raced across North America, Hamilton prematurely got in the act with the promotion of various paper lines in the 1830s.
People associated with Hamilton who became well-known prior to 1946 are listed below in the order of their birth year.
Étienne Brûlé, (1592-1633), The first European to visit what is now Hamilton was probably Étienne Brûlé in 1616 [REF].
Robert Land, (1736-1818), veteran of the American Revolution and one of Hamilton's founding citizens [REF].
John Askin, (1739-1815), was a fur trader, merchant and official in Upper Canada [REF].
Nathaniel Hughson, (1755-1837), Farmer & hotel owner, Loyalist who moved to Canada following the American Revolution, one of the city founders of Hamilton [REF].
William Rymal, (1759-1852), farmer and one of earliest settlers on the Hamilton mountain.
Richard Beasley (1761-1842), was a soldier, political figure, farmer and businessman in Upper Canada [REF].
John Vincent, (1764-1848), British army officer in the Battle of Stoney Creek, War of 1812 [REF].
Richard Hatt (1769-1819), was a businessman, judge and political figure in Upper Canada [REF].
James Gage, (1774-1854), Lumber merchant, miller.
James Durand, (1775-1833), was a businessman and political figure in Upper Canada [REF].
John Willson, (1776-1860) was a judge and political figure in Upper Canada [REF].
Peter Hess, (1779-1855), farmer, landowner.
George Hamilton, (1788-1836), settler and city founder [REF].
Henry Beasley, (1793-1859), was a farmer and office-holder [REF].
Sir Allan MacNab, (Sir Allan Napier MacNab), (1798-1862), soldier, lawyer, businessman, knight and former Prime Minister of Upper Canada.
Thomas Stinson, (1798-1864), merchant, banker, landowner.
George Perkins Boothesby Bull, (1795-1847), newspaper printer, publisher of one of Hamilton's early newspapers The Hamilton Gazette (1835-1856) [REF].
Edward Jackson, (1799-1872), tinware manufacturer.
Peter Hunter Hamilton, (1800-1857), landowner and businessman + half brother of city founder George Hamilton.
Colin Campbell Ferrie, (1808-1856), Hamilton's first Mayor [REF].
Isaac Buchanan, (1810-1883), was a businessman and political figure in Canada West [REF].
Daniel C. Gunn, (1811-1876), wharfinger, locomotive manufacturer [REF].
James Jolley, (1813-1892), saddler, harnessmaker, politician.
Dennis Moore, (1817-1887), tinware manufacturer [REF].
Hugh Cossart Baker, Sr., (1818-1859), Banker, businessman, mathematician.
Richard Wanzer, (1818-1900), sewing machine manufacturer [REF].
Thomas Mayne Daly, Sr., (1827-1885), was a businessman and political figure in Canada West (later Ontario).
Thomas Bain, (1834-1915), Speaker of the Canadian House of Commons [REF].
Richard Butler, (1834-1925), editor, publisher, journalist.
George Elias Tuckett, (1835-1900), Tuckett Tobacco Company, Hamilton's 27th Mayor [REF].
James McMillan, (1838-1902), was a U.S. Senator from the state of Michigan from 1889-1902 [REF].
William Eli Sanford (1838-1899), was a Canadian businessman, philanthropist, and politician [REF].
George Johnson, (1839-1917), teacher and songwriter.
Sir John Morison Gibson, (1842-1929), lawyer, politician, businessman [REF].
Clementina Trenholme, (1844-1918), Clementina (Fessenden) Trenholme, author, social organizer.
Hugh Cossart Baker, Jr., (1846-1931), businessman, telephone pioneer [REF].
William W. Cooke, (1846-1876), was a military officer in the United States Army during the American Civil War and the Black Hills War.
Allan Studholme, (1846-1919), stove maker and first Ontario Labour MLA [REF].
Sir William Osler, (1849-1919), 1st Baronet, the Father of Modern Medicine [REF].
Robert B. Harris, (1852-1933), businessman who established The Hamilton Herald newspaper in 1889 [REF].
E. D. Smith, (1853-1948), farmer, businessman and politician [REF].
James Balfour, (1854-1917), architect, Canada Life Assurance Company building at corner of King & James (1883), City Hall on corner of James & York (1888) [REF].
Robert Kirkland Kernighan, (1854-1926), poet, journalist.
Robert Stanley Weir, (1856-1926), lawyer, poet, author, best remembered as the author of the English lyrics to O Canada [REF].
Charles S. Wilcox, (1856-1938), First president of Iron and Steel Company of Canada, (later called simply Stelco), which was formed from five companies, including his Hamilton Steel and Iron Company [REF].
Sir John Strathearn Hendrie, (1857-1923), was Lieutenant Governor of Ontario from 1914 to 1919 [REF].
Adam Inch, (1857-1933), dairy farmer, politician.
Andrew Ross, (1857-1941), businessman, builder of Tivoli Theatre & Barton Street Arena [REF].
Adelaide Hoodless, (1858-1910), education and women's activist [REF].
John Moodie Jr., (1859-1944), executive, hobbyist, drove first automobile in Canada in 1898; a one-cylinder Winton he imported from Cleveland, Ohio [REF].
Thomas Willson, (1860-1915), Canadian inventor, designed and patented the first electric arc lamps [REF].
Sydney Chilton Mewburn, (1863-1956), was a Canadian lawyer and politician.
John Charles Fields, (1863-1932), was a Canadian mathematician and the founder of the Fields Medal for outstanding achievement in mathematics.
Helen Gregory MacGill, (1864-1947), the first woman in British Columbia to be appointed a judge of the juvenile Court, a post she held for 23 years [REF].
Julia Arthur, (1868-1959), was a Canadian-born stage and film actress [REF].
Walter Rollo, first Ontario minister of labour.
John M. Lyle, (1872-1945), Canadian architect in the late 19th Century; New York Public Library (1897), Royal Alexandra Theatre, in Toronto (1907), Union Station (Toronto) 1914-1921 [REF].
Clifton Sherman, (1872-1955), Founded Dominion Foundries and Steel (later called Dofasco) in 1912 (with his brother Frank Sherman), creating a giant that would bring prosperity and identity to the city [REF].
Charles William Bell, (1876-1938), Playwright, Politician and Rocco Perri's Lawyer [REF].
Florence Harvey, (1878-1968), Golf, Ontario Ladies Amateur Champion 1904, 1906, 1913, and 1914.
William Sherring, (1878-1964), was a Canadian athlete, gold medal winner of the marathon race at the 1906 Summer Olympics [REF].
Elizabeth Bagshaw, (1881-1982), physician and birth control activist [REF].
John Christie Holland, (1882-1954), In 1924, became an ordained Minister and served as Pastor of Hamilton's Steward Memorial Church.
Robert Kerr, (1882-1963), was an Irish-Canadian sprinter.
Thomas McQuesten, (1882-1948), lawyer and Ontario minister of transportation [REF].
Rocco Perri, (1887-1944), 1920s Gangster.
Frank Sherman, (1887-1967), Founded Dominion Foundries and Steel (later called Dofasco) in 1912 (with his brother Clifton Sherman), creating a giant that would bring prosperity and identity to the city [REF].
Harry Crerar, (1888-1965), was a Canadian general and the country's "leading field commander" in World War II [REF].
James Lyle Telford, (1889-1960), was mayor of Vancouver, B.C. from 1939-40 [REF].
Florence Lawrence, (1890-1938), Hollywood's first movie star [REF].
Dick Irvin Sr., (1892-1957), NHL hockey player.
Del Lord, (1894-1970), was a film director and actor best known as a director of Three Stooges films.
Frank O'Rourke, (1894-1986), ex-pro MLB baseball player and long time New York Yankees scout [REF].
Cecil "Babe" Dye, (1898-1962), NHL hockey player, NHL's top goal scorer of the 1920s, inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1970 [REF].
Harold A. Rogers, (1899-1994), was the founder of Kin Canada, is a Canadian non-profit service organization that promotes service, fellowship, positive values, and national pride [REF].
George Owen, (1901-1986) was a pro hockey defenceman for the Boston Bruins of the NHL [REF].
Robert McDonald, (1902-1956), was a Canadian soccer player from the 1920s and 1930s who spent a decade playing for famous Scottish football club Rangers [REF].
John Foote, (1904-1988), military chaplain and Ontario cabinet minister.
George Klein, (1904-1992), often called "the most productive inventor in Canada in the 20th century"; electric wheelchairs, microsurgical staple gun, the ZEEP nuclear reactor and the Canadarm [REF].
Red Horner, (1909-2005), ex-pro hockey player, helped Toronto Maple Leafs win their first Stanley Cup in 1932 [REF].
Ray Lewis, (1910-2003), Track & Field, first Canadian-born Black Olympic medalist [REF].
Jackie Callura, (1914-1943), Canadian featherweight Boxer, World featherweight champion 1943 [REF].
Harold E. Johns, (1915-1998), was a Canadian medical physicist, noted for his extensive contributions to the use of ionizing radiation to treat cancer [REF].
Jackie Washington, (1919-2009), blues musician and railway worker [REF].
Joe Krol, (1919- ), Canadian Football quarterback (1932-53), Lou Marsh Trophy winner as Canada's top athlete in 1946 [REF].
Syl Apps, (1915-1998), Legendary Toronto Maple Leafs captain who led the Leafs to 3-Stanley Cups.
Win Mortimer, (1919-1998), was a comic book and comic strip artist for the DC Comics superhero Superman [REF].
Leo Reise Jr., (1922- ), retired NHL hockey defenseman.
John Callaghan, (1923-2004), Canadian cardiologist who pioneered open-heart surgery [REF].
As war clouds gathered over Europe, Britain decided to shore up its support in the Dominions by having a royal visit to Canada.
Hamiltonians like others in Canada and the world welcomed the spike of economic demand caused by the Second World War but not its source.
Unlike the First World War, in this war the Canadian Army mobilized its territorially recruited militia units as a body rather than soliciting individuals to serve in conglomerated units.
On the home front, the public not only eagerly followed the progress of the war, but they also got a chance to see airmen in action.
The army's enforced idleness-disregarding their unsuccessful foray to France in May 1940 and disastrous defence of Hong Kong in December 1941-led to discontent in the army, the public and the government.
When the war finally ended, Hamilton was a much different place.
The Great War was a somber affair, but post-war dream seemed secure in the Roaring Twenties.
The Hamilton Board of Education resumed its ambitious building program for schools.
Higher education-disregarding its normal school or teachers college-arrived in Hamilton in 1930.
Local boosters also ensured that Hamilton hosted the inaugural Empire Games, now known as the Commonwealth Games in 1930.
The Great Depression of the 1930s hit Hamilton hard.
Emotional relief from the Depression was found in the Washingtons, local brothers who performed as a blues quartet throughout Ontario [REF].
Thomas B. McQuesten, a Hamilton lawyer and MLA, served as minister of transportation and chairman Niagara Parks Commission starting in 1934.
Official City status was achieved on June 9, 1846 [REF].
As a result of municipal reorganization of Wentworth County, Caistor Township (earlier and later part of West Lincoln) was briefly added in 1845.
Hamilton City Council was based on a board of control, which effectively meant an executive committee of at-large city councillors controlled the city government.
Not content with this relatively minor operation, dozens of small workshops and craftsmen banded together to smelt steel rather than just mill steel.
Other industrial ventures conducted in the Ambitious City (a phrase adopted by The Spectator from detractors in Toronto) and Birmingham of Canada included manufactured tobacco, beer and other consumer products.
Long before the Royal Military College of Canada was established in 1876, there were proposals for military colleges in Canada.
Like most of the Americas south of the water line, the original inhabitants of the Hamilton area were Native North American Aboriginal peoples.
In pre-became Upper Canada in 1791 and ultimately Ontario in 1867.
Administratively, the whole area was part of the Nassau District, which was renamed the Home District in 1792.
Modernization and business consolidation often went hand in hand with unionization.
But it was definitely not all work and no play for local residents.
Adelaide Hoodless and other founded the first Women's Institute in Saltfleet Township (Stoney Creek) in 1897 and began her educational campaign for home economics.
Hamiltonians, like other residents of the colonies, discovered one of the darker sides of British Imperialism when the South African War broke out in 1899.
Ernest D'Israeli Smith, after being frustrated by paying to have his fruit transported from the Stoney Creek area, had founded a company in 1882 to market directly to wholesalers and eliminate the middleman.
By the end of the 19th century, symbolically marked by the death of Queen Victoria in the first days of the 20th century, Hamilton expanded to the approximate limits of the Mountain Brow to the south, Chedoke Creek to the west and Gage Avenue to the east.
Through natural increase and immigration, the urban Hamilton-rural Wentworth population balance shifted so much that in 1904 the federal ridings were redistributed.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and , or 5.82%, is water.
Hopkinton is 17mi east of Worcester, 26mi west of Boston, and 195mi from New York City.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the census-designated place for the village has a total area of , of which is land and 0.22% is water [REF].
The climate in Hopkinton tends to be quite warm during the summer, with daily high temperatures averaging in the 80s.
The warmest month of the year is July with an average minimum and maximum temperature of and respectively.
Temperature variations between night and day tend to be fairly limited during summer with a difference that can reach , and fairly limited during winter with an average difference of .
The annual average precipitation at Hopkinton is .
Since its incorporation in 1715, Hopkinton has retained its original Open Town Meeting form of government.
Begins on the first Monday in May and continues on consecutive evenings until the entire warrant is voted on.
The Town Meeting Warrant is a document composed of the articles to be voted on.
Held on the third Monday in May.
Massachusetts has 14 counties which were regional administrative districts before the Revolutionary War [REF].
Its county seats are Cambridge and Lowell.
Hopkinton is situated 26mi west of Boston in the MetroWest region of Massachusetts.
Hopkinton is served by two interstate highways and two state highways.
There is no passenger or freight rail service in Hopkinton.
Hopkinton is served by the Southborough MBTA Station, located on the border of Hopkinton and Southborough on Route 85 at Southville Road.
Originally called the Framingham Commuter Rail Line, Framingham was the end of the line until rail traffic was expanded to Worcester in 1996 [REF].
Direct rail service to Boston, to New York, and to many other points on the Amtrak network (National Railroad Passenger Corporation) is available through nearby Framingham.
CSX Transportation provides freight rail service and operates an auto transloading facility in nearby Framingham.
Hopkinton is a Member Community of the MetroWest Regional Transit Authority, which provides local bus service to several towns in the MetroWest area, with service to the MBTA commuter rail station at Framingham.
Big W Transportation provides service to Framingham.
Peter Pan Bus Lines provides service to Worcester and Boston from Framingham.
Boston's Logan International Airport is easily accessible from nearby Framingham.
The Worcester Municipal Airport, a Primary Commercial (PR) facility with scheduled passenger service, is easily accessible.
MassDOT also operates a free park and ride facility at a parking lot adjacent to exit 12 of the Massachusetts Turnpike, across from California Avenue on the west side of Framingham [REF].
Hopkinton has a PEG television network known as HCAM, which controls two channels.
HCAM-TV is the most-received of HCAM's channels, available in every household with cable television in the area.
HCAM-ED, sister channel to HCAM-TV, is received by less households and has lower programming standards than HCAM-TV.
The town of Hopkinton was incorporated on December 13, 1715.
Grain was the first production crop grown in the area, while fruit and dairy industries were developed later.
There are 215 Hopkinton properties listed in the State Register of Historic Places.
Twenty-three properties are included within the Hopkinton Center Historic District, a local historic district which comprises properties around the Town Common, on East Main St. and the south side of Main St.
In 2005 the town established a second historic district in the village of Woodville.
Within or near the Miscoe-Warren-Whitehall Watersheds ACEC (Area of Critical Environmental Concern), remains of large pits have been found.
At one time, it was believed that the waters flowing from the large swamp south of Pond St., under Pond St. and into Lake Whitehall contained magical healing powers.
Hopkinton gains national attention once a year in April as it hosts the start of the Boston Marathon, a role the town has enjoyed since 1924.
As of the census[REF] of 2010, there were 14,925 people, 4,957 households, and 3,978 families residing in the town.
There were 4,957 households out of which 48.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 70.5% were married couples living together, 6.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 19.7% were non-families.
Population was well-distributed by age, with 33.6% under the age of 20, 3.4% from 20 to 24, 22.0% from 25 to 44, 33.0% from 45 to 64, and 7.9% who were 65 years of age or older.
As of 2000, the median income for a household in the town was $89,281, and the median income for a family was $102,550.
As of the census[REF] of 2000, there were 2,628 people, 1,003 households, and 672 families residing in the CDP.
There were 1,003 households out of which 34.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.4% were married couples living together, 9.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.0% were non-families.
In the CDP the population was spread out with 26.5% under the age of 18, 4.3% from 18 to 24, 32.0% from 25 to 44, 20.5% from 45 to 64, and 16.7% who were 65 years of age or older.
The median income for a household in the CDP was $52,250, and the median income for a family was $68,050.
The Town of Hopkinton has a public school system which serves students from pre-kindergarten through twelfth grade.
Hopkinton offered a fee-based full-day kindergarten option for the first time during the 2010-11 school year via a lottery system.
In May 2013 voters approved funding a new Center School Feasibility Study.
Hopkinton High's school mascot is the Hiller "H", as the sports teams are known as the Hopkinton Hillers.
The Hopkinton Public Library was founded in 1867.
The town library was established by the Young Men's Christian Association in 1867.
The library was transferred to the town government in May 2010.
In January 2016, the library moved to a temporary location at 65 South Street while the historic building on Main Street undergoes a major renovation and expansion [REF].
The Town of Hopkinton established a historical commission which manages "the preservation, protection and development of the historical or archeological assets of such city or town".
Hopkinton has two properties in the register [REF].
Cedar Swamp Archeological District, Address Restricted.
The 26 homes below were built in Hopkinton in 18th century.
The 188 homes below were built in Hopkinton in 19th century.
Freedmen were very active in forming their own churches, mostly Baptist or Methodist, and giving their ministers both moral and political leadership roles.
Blacks in the South were a core element of the Republican Party and their ministers had powerful political roles that were distinctive since they did not depend on white support, in contrast to teachers, politicians, businessmen, and tenant farmers [REF].
In a highly controversial move, the Northern Methodists used the Army to seize control of Methodist churches in large cities, over the vehement protests of the Southern Methodists.
Across the North most evangelical denominations, especially the Methodists, Congregationalists and Presbyterians, as well as the Quakers, were strong supporters of Radical policies.
The denominations all sent missionaries, teachers and activists to the South to help the Freedmen.
Many Americans interpreted great events in religious terms.
Historian James D. Anderson argues that the freed slaves were the first Southerners "to campaign for universal, state-supported public education."[REF]
The Republicans created a system of public schools, which were segregated by race everywhere except New Orleans.
The rural areas faced many difficulties opening and maintaining public schools.
After the war, northern missionaries founded numerous private academies and colleges across the South for freedmen.
In the late 19th century, the federal government established land grant legislation to provide funding for higher education across the United States.
Every Southern state subsidized railroads, which modernizers felt could haul the South out of isolation and poverty.
Reconstruction changed the means of taxation in the South.
The following table shows property tax rates for South Carolina and Mississippi.
Called upon to pay taxes on their property, essentially for the first time, angry plantation owners revolted.
The interpretation of Reconstruction has been a topic of controversy.
The first generation of Northern historians believed that the former Confederates were traitors and Johnson was their ally who threatened to undo the Union's constitutional achievements.
The black leader Booker T. Washington, who grew up in West Virginia during Reconstruction, concluded later that, "the Reconstruction experiment in racial democracy failed because it began at the wrong end, emphasizing political means and civil rights acts rather than economic means and self-determination."[REF]
The Dunning School of scholars were trained at the history department of Columbia University under Professor William A. Dunning analyzed Reconstruction as a failure after 1866 for different reasons.
In the 1930s, historical revisionism became popular among scholars.
President Andrew Johnson had tried, and failed, to stop the juggernaut of the industrialists.
The Beardian interpretation of the causes of the Civil War downplayed slavery, abolitionism, and issues of morality.
The Beards were especially interested in the Reconstruction era, as the industrialists of the Northeast and the farmers of the West cashed in on their great victory over the southern aristocracy.
Wisconsin historian William Hesseltine added the point that the Northeastern businessmen wanted to control the Southern economy directly, which they did through ownership of the railroads [REF].
The black scholar W. E. B. Du Bois, in his Black Reconstruction in America, 1860-1880, published in 1935, compared results across the states to show achievements by the Reconstruction legislatures and to refute claims about wholesale African-American control of governments.
In the 1960s neoabolitionist historians emerged, led by John Hope Franklin, Kenneth Stampp, Leon Litwack, and Eric Foner.
Instead, they emphasized that suppression of the rights of African Americans was a worse scandal and a grave corruption of America's republican ideals.
Re-establishment of white supremacy meant that within a decade African Americans were excluded from virtually all local, state and federal governance in all states of the South.
In 1990 Eric Foner concluded that from the black point of view, "Reconstruction must be judged a failure."[REF]
While 1877 is the usual date given for the end of Reconstruction, some historians extend the era to the 1890s [REF].
Economists and economic historians have different interpretations of the economic impact of race on the postwar Southern economy.
Reconstruction is widely considered a failure, though the reason for this is a matter of controversy.
The Dunning School considered failure inevitable because it felt that taking the right to vote or hold office away from Southern whites was a violation of republicanism.
A second school sees the reason for failure as Northern Republicans' lack of effectiveness in guaranteeing political rights to blacks.
A third school blames the failure on not giving land to the freedmen so they could have their own economic base of power.
A fourth school sees the major reason for the failure of reconstruction as the states' inability to suppress the violence of Southern whites when they sought reversal for blacks' gains.
Other historians emphasize the failure to fully incorporate Southern Unionists into the Republican coalition [REF].
Historian Donald R. Shaffer maintained that the gains during Reconstruction for African Americans were not entirely extinguished.
The journalist Joel Chandler Harris, writing as "Joe Harris" for the Atlanta Constitution (mostly after Reconstruction), tried to advance racial and sectional reconciliation in the late 19th century.
As Confederate states came back under control of the US Army, President Abraham Lincoln set up reconstructed governments in Tennessee, Arkansas, and Louisiana during the war.
In ten states,[REF] coalitions of freedmen, recent black and white arrivals from the North (carpetbaggers), and white Southerners who supported Reconstruction (scalawags) cooperated to form Republican biracial state governments.
The end of Reconstruction was a staggered process, and the period of Republican control ended at different times in different states.
The laws and constitutional amendments that laid the foundation for the most radical phase of Reconstruction were adopted from 1866 to 1871.
In the 1860s and 1870s the terms "radical" and "conservative" had distinctive meanings.
Passage of the 13th, 14th, and 15th Amendments is the constitutional legacy of Reconstruction.
During the Civil War, many in the North believed that fighting for the Union was a noble cause - for the preservation of the Union and the end of slavery.
In 1868, the Republicans unanimously chose Ulysses S. Grant to be the Republican Presidential candidate.
Immediately upon Inauguration in 1869, Grant bolstered Reconstruction by prodding Congress to readmit Virginia, Mississippi, and Texas into the Union, while ensuring their constitutions protected every citizen's voting rights [REF].
In Grant's two terms he strengthened Washington's legal capabilities to directly intervene to protect citizenship rights even if the states ignored the problem [REF].
To counter vote fraud in the Democratic stronghold of New York City, Grant sent in tens of thousands of armed, uniformed federal marshals and other election officials to regulate the 1870 and subsequent elections.
Grant's support from Congress and the nation declined due to scandals within his administration and the political resurgence of the Democrats in the North and South.
Republicans took control of all Southern state governorships and state legislatures, except for Virginia [REF].
About 137 black officeholders had lived outside the South before the Civil War.
There were few African Americans elected or appointed to national office.
While the "Scalawag" element of Republican whites supported measures for black civil rights, the conservative whites typically opposed these measures.
The opponents of Reconstruction formed state political parties, affiliated with the national Democratic party and often named the "Conservative party."
Often, these white Southerners identified as the "Conservative Party" or the "Democratic and Conservative Party" in order to distinguish themselves from the national Democratic Party and to obtain support from former Whigs.
Most [white] members of both the planter/business class and common farmer class of the South opposed black power, carpetbaggers and military rule, and sought white supremacy.
Fleming described the first results of the insurgent movement as "good," and the later ones as "both good and bad."
As Reconstruction continued, whites accompanied elections with increased violence in an attempt to run Republicans out of office and suppress black voting.
By 1872, President Ulysses S. Grant had alienated large numbers of leading Republicans, including many Radicals, by the corruption of his administration and his use of federal soldiers to prop up Radical state regimes in the South.
Grant made up for the defections by new gains among Union veterans and by strong support from the "Stalwart" faction of his party (which depended on his patronage), and the Southern Republican parties.
In the South, political-racial tensions built up inside the Republican party as they were attacked by the Democrats.
Meanwhile, in state after state the freedmen were demanding a bigger share of the offices and patronage, squeezing out carpetbagger allies but never commanding the numbers equivalent to their population proportion.
Finally, some of the more prosperous freedmen were joining the Democrats, as they were angered at the failure of the Republicans to help them acquire land.
Although historians such as W. E. B. Du Bois celebrated a cross-racial coalition of poor whites and blacks, such coalitions rarely formed in these years.
Lynch reported that poor whites resented the job competition from freedmen.
By 1870, the Democratic-Conservative leadership across the South decided it had to end its opposition to Reconstruction and black suffrage to survive and move on to new issues.
Not all Democrats agreed
In North Carolina, Republican Governor William Woods Holden used state troops against the Klan, but the prisoners were released by federal judges.
In the lower South, violence increased as new insurgent groups arose, including the Red Shirts in Mississippi and the Carolinas, and the White League in Louisiana.
Slates for local offices were certified by each candidate.
This marked the beginning of heightened insurgency and attacks on Republican officeholders and freedmen in Louisiana and other Deep South states.
In the North, a live-and-let-live attitude made elections more like a sporting contest.
The Panic of 1873 (a depression) hit the Southern economy hard and disillusioned many Republicans who had gambled that railroads would pull the South out of its poverty.
Nationally, President Grant was blamed for the depression; the Republican Party lost 96 seats in all parts of the country in the 1874 elections.
Political violence was endemic in Louisiana.
Similarly, the Red Shirts, another paramilitary group, arose in 1875 in Mississippi and the Carolinas.
Democrats and many northern Republicans agreed that Confederate nationalism and slavery were dead-the war goals were achieved-and further federal military interference was an undemocratic violation of historic Republican values.
An explosion of violence accompanied the campaign for the Mississippi's 1875 election, in which Red Shirts and Democratic rifle clubs, operating in the open, threatened or shot enough Republicans to decide the election for the Democrats.
The campaigns and elections of 1876 were marked by additional murders and attacks on Republicans in Louisiana, North and South Carolina, and Florida.
Reconstruction continued in South Carolina, Louisiana and Florida until 1877.
The white Democrats in the South agreed to accept Hayes's victory if he withdrew the last Federal troops.
On January 29, 1877 President Grant signed the Electoral Commission Act which set up a 15-member commission to settle the disputed 1876 election of 8 Republicans and 7 Democrats.
After assuming office on March 4, 1877, President Hayes removed troops from the capitals of the remaining Reconstruction states, Louisiana and South Carolina, allowing the Redeemers to have full control of these states.
The Democrats gained control of the Senate, and had complete control of Congress, having taken over the House in 1875.
Numerous blacks were elected to local office through the 1880s, and in the 1890s in some states, biracial coalitions of Populists and Republicans briefly held control of state legislatures.
Northern anger over the assassination of Lincoln and the immense human cost of the war led to demands for punitive policies.
Smith argues that, "Johnson attempted to carry forward what he considered to be Lincoln's plans for Reconstruction."[REF]
Historians agree that President Johnson was an inept politician who lost all his advantages by his clumsy moves.
However, the fears of the mostly conservative planter elite and other leading white citizens were partly assuaged by the actions of President Johnson, who ensured that a wholesale land redistribution from the planters to the freedman did not occur.
Southern state governments quickly enacted the restrictive "black codes".
The Black Codes indicated the plans of the southern whites for the former slaves [REF].
The freedmen, with the strong backing of the Freedmen's Bureau, rejected gang-labor work patterns that had been used in slavery.
Northern officials gave varying reports on conditions for the freedmen in the South.
Carl Schurz, "Report on the Condition of the South", December 1865 (U.S. Senate Exec.
The report included sworn testimony from soldiers and officials of the Freedmen's Bureau.
Much of the violence that was perpetrated against African Americans was shaped by gendered prejudices regarding African Americans.
During fall 1865, out of response to the Black codes and worrisome signs of Southern recalcitrance, the Radical Republicans blocked the readmission of the former rebellious states to the Congress.
Congress, however, controlled by the Radicals, had other plans.
In January 1866, Congress renewed the Freedmen's Bureau; however, Johnson vetoed the Freedmen's Bureau Bill in February 1866.
Senator Lyman Trumbull of Illinois, leader of the moderate Republicans, took affront at the black codes.
The bill did not give Freedmen the right to vote.
Although strongly urged by moderates in Congress to sign the Civil Rights bill, Johnson broke decisively with them by vetoing it on March 27, 1866.
The Democratic Party, proclaiming itself the party of white men, north and south, supported Johnson [REF].
The last moderate proposal was the Fourteenth Amendment, whose principal drafter was Representative John Bingham.
During the Civil War, the Radical Republican leaders argued that slavery and the Slave Power had to be permanently destroyed.
President Lincoln was the leader of the moderate Republicans and wanted to speed up Reconstruction and reunite the nation painlessly and quickly.
By late 1866 the opposing faction of Radical Republicans was skeptical of Southern intentions.
Upon Lincoln's assassination in April 1865, Andrew Johnson of Tennessee, who had been elected with Lincoln in 1864 as vice president, became president.
Congress rejected Johnson's argument that he had the war power to decide what to do, since the war was over.
The election of 1866 decisively changed the balance of power, giving the Republicans two-thirds majorities in both houses of Congress, and enough votes to overcome Johnson's vetoes.
The Republican Congress established military districts in the South and used Army personnel to administer the region until new governments loyal to the Union-that accepted the 14th Amendment and the right of freedmen to vote-could be established.
With the power to vote, freedmen started participating in politics.
The issue of loyalty emerged in the debates over the Wade-Davis Bill of 1864.
Congress had to consider how to restore to full status and representation within the Union those southern states that had declared their independence from the United States and had withdrawn their representation.
Second, and closely related, was the issue of whether the roughly four million freedmen should be allowed to vote.
Lincoln had supported a middle position to allow some black men to vote, especially army veterans.
In the South, many poor whites were illiterate as there was almost no public education before the war.
Sumner soon concluded that "there was no substantial protection for the freedman except in the franchise."
The Republicans believed that the best way for men to get political experience was to be able to vote and to participate in the political system.
From 1890 to 1908, southern states passed new constitutions and laws that disfranchised most blacks and tens of thousands of poor whites with new voter registration and electoral rules.
The Five Civilized Tribes that had been relocated to Indian Territory (now part of Oklahoma) held black slaves and signed treaties supporting the Confederacy.
As a component of Reconstruction, the Interior Department ordered a meeting of representatives from all Indian tribes which had affiliated with the Confederacy [REF].
Concerned that President Johnson viewed Congress as an "illegal body" and wanted to overthrow the government, Republicans in Congress took control of Reconstruction policies after the election of 1866 [REF].
The South's white leaders, who held power in the immediate postwar era before the vote was granted to the freedmen, renounced secession and slavery, but not white supremacy.
Three Constitutional amendments, known as the Reconstruction Amendments, were adopted.
Many blacks took an active part in voting and political life, and rapidly continued to build churches and community organizations.
The Reconstruction Acts as originally passed, were initially called "An act to provide for the more efficient Government of the Rebel States" the legislation was enacted by the 39th Congress, on March 2, 1867.
With the Radicals in control, Congress passed the Reconstruction Acts on July 19, 1867.
20,000 U.S. troops were deployed to enforce the Act.
The four border states that had not joined the Confederacy were not subject to military Reconstruction.
The ten Southern state governments were re-constituted under the direct control of the United States Army.
The eleven Southern states held constitutional conventions giving black men the right to vote.,[REF]
Until 1872, most former Confederate or prewar Southern office holders were disqualified from voting or holding office; all but 500 top Confederate leaders were pardoned by the Amnesty Act of 1872 [REF].
The conventions had all written new constitutions that were adopted by popular vote, at which point Congress was ready to readmit them.
Reconstruction played out against an economy in ruin.
Farms were in disrepair, and the prewar stock of horses, mules and cattle was much depleted; two-fifths, or 40%, of the South's livestock had been killed [REF].
The enormous cost of the Confederate war effort took a high toll on the South's economic infrastructure.
The end of the Civil War was accompanied by a large migration of new freed people to the cities [REF].
Over a quarter of Southern white men of military age-the backbone of the South's white workforce-died during the war, leaving countless families destitute [REF].
President Lincoln signed two Confiscation Acts into law, the first on August 6, 1861, and the second on July 17, 1862, safeguarding fugitive slaves from the Confederacy that came over into Union lines and giving them indirect emancipation if their masters continued insurrection against the United States.
On April 16, 1862 Lincoln signed a bill into law outlawing slavery in Washington D.C. and freeing the estimated 3,500 slaves in the city and on June 19, 1862 he signed legislation outlawing slavery in all U.S. territories.
In an effort to keep border states in the Union, President Lincoln as early as 1861 designed gradual compensated emancipation programs paid for by government bonds.
In August 1862, President Lincoln met with African-American leaders and urged them to colonize some place in Central America.
Starting in March 1862, in an effort to forestall Reconstruction by the Radicals in Congress, President Lincoln installed military governors in certain rebellious states under Union military control [REF].
In July 1862, President Lincoln became convinced that "a military necessity" was needed to strike at slavery in order to win the Civil War for the Union.
On January 1, 1863, the actual Emancipation Proclamation was issued, specifically naming ten states in which slaves would be "forever free".
President Abraham Lincoln was concerned to effect a speedy restoration of the Confederate states to the Union after the Civil War.
Before 1864, slave marriages had not been recognized legally; emancipation did not affect them [REF].
On March 3, 1865 the Freedmen's Bureau Bill became law, sponsored by the Republicans to aid freedmen and white refugees.
With the help of the Bureau, the recently freed slaves began voting, forming political parties, and assuming the control of labor in many areas.
Even with the benefits that it gave to the freedmen, the Freedmen's Bureau was unable to operate effectively in certain areas.
Other legislation was signed that broadened equality and rights for African Americans.
Lincoln and Secretary of State William H. Seward met with three southern representatives to discuss the peaceful reconstruction of the Union and the Confederacy on February 3, 1865 in Hampton Roads, Virginia.
Lincoln continued to advocate his Louisiana Plan as a model for all states up until his assassination on April 14, 1865.
The city centre is located on the northern bank of the Nieuwe Maas, although recent urban development has extended the centre to parts of southern Rotterdam known as De Kop van Zuid ('the Head of South', i.e. the northern part of southern Rotterdam).
Built mostly behind dikes, large parts of the Rotterdam are below sea level.
The Rotte river no longer joins the Nieuwe Maas directly.
Between the summers of 2003 and 2008, an artificial beach was created at the Boompjeskade along the Nieuwe Maas, between the Erasmus Bridge and the Willems Bridge.
Rotterdam forms the centre of the Rijnmond conurbation, bordering the conurbation surrounding The Hague to the north-west.
On its turn, the Rijnmond conurbation is part of the southern wing (the Zuidvleugel) of the Randstad, which is one of the most important economic and densely populated areas in the north-west of Europe.
Rotterdam experiences a temperate oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification Cfb) similar to all of the Netherlands.
Giovanni van Bronckhorst, former football player and current manager of Feyenoord.
Desiderius Erasmus, philosopher and humanist.
Pim Fortuyn, politician, assassinated in 2002.
Colonel Tom Parker, manager of Elvis Presley.
Piet Heyn, naval fleet officer.
Rem Koolhaas, internationally renowned architect.
Coen Moulijn, football player of Feyenoord.
Johan van Oldebarnevelt, statesman of the Dutch Revolt.
Robin van Persie, Fenerbahçe S.K. forward and Dutch international footballer.
Bernard Mandeville, philosopher, political economist and satirist.
Jules Deelder, poet, writer, DJ, night mayor.
In 1898, the high-rise office building the White House (in Dutch Witte Huis) was completed, at that time the tallest office building in Europe.
Rotterdam is also famous for its Lijnbaan 1952 by architects Broek en Bakema, Peperklip by architect Carel Weeber, Kubuswoningen or cube houses designed by architect Piet Blom 1984.
The newest landmark in Rotterdam is the Markthal, designed by architect firm MVRDV.
Rotterdam also houses several of the tallest structures in the Netherlands.
The Erasmusbrug (1996) is a 790-meter (2,600 ft) cable stayed bridge linking the north and south of Rotterdam.
Rotterdam is also home to the tallest office building 'Maastoren' () which houses Deloitte.
The city also houses the 186m tall Euromast, which is a major tourist attraction.
Rotterdam has a reputation in being a platform for architectural development and education through the Berlage Institute, a postgraduate laboratory of architecture, and the NAi (Netherlands Architecture Institute), which is open to the public and has a variety of good exhibitions on architecture and urban planning issues.
Rotterdam is has a position in the best European SkylineTop together with Frankfurt, London, Madrid, Paris, Warsaw and Moscow.
Boston & Seattle,[REF] two buildings with a height of each are being built at Kop van Zuid.
Rotterdam features in Edgar Allan Poe's short story 'The Unparalleled Adventure of One Hans Pfaall' (1835), as well as J.T. Sheridan Le Fanu's 'Strange Event in the Life of Schalken the Painter' (1839) [REF].
Part of Jackie Chan's 1998 film 'Who am I?' is set in Rotterdam.
Ender's Shadow, part of the series Ender's Game is partially set in Rotterdam.
In season 1, episode 2 of The Golden Girls ("Guess Who's Coming to the Wedding?"), Dorothy reminisces how her ex-husband, Stan, would buy her tulips after they had a fight.
In 1996 The British band The Beautiful South recorded a song named after this region titled Rotterdam (or Anywhere).,[REF] .
The settlement at the lower end of the fen stream Rotte (or Rotta, as it was then known, from rot, "muddy" and a, "water", thus "muddy water") dates from at least 900 CE.
On 7 July 1340, Count Willem IV of Holland granted city rights to Rotterdam, which then had approximately 2,000 inhabitants.
The port of Rotterdam grew slowly but steadily into a port of importance, becoming the seat of one of the six "chambers" of the Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie (VOC), the Dutch East India Company.
The greatest spurt of growth, both in port activity and population, followed the completion of the Nieuwe Waterweg in 1872.
During World War I the city was the world's largest spy centre because of Dutch neutrality and its strategic location in between Great-Britain, Germany and German-occupied Belgium.
During World War II, the German army invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940 [REF].
Rotterdam was gradually rebuilt from the 1950s through to the 1970s.
Rotterdam has always been one of the main centres of the shipping industry in the Netherlands.
Nowadays, well-known companies with headquarters in Rotterdam are consumers goods company Unilever, asset management firm Robeco, energy company Eneco, dredging company Van Oord, oil company Shell Downstream, terminal operator Vopak,commodity trading company Vitol and architecture firm Office for Metropolitan Architecture.
The City of Rotterdam makes use of the services of semi-government companies Roteb (to take care of sanitation, waste management and assorted services) and the Port of Rotterdam Authority (to maintain the Port of Rotterdam).
Being the largest port and one of the largest cities of the country, Rotterdam attracts many people seeking jobs, especially in the cheap labour segment.
Together with Eindhoven (Brainport) and Amsterdam (Airport), Rotterdam (Seaport) forms the foundation of the Dutch economy [REF].
Rotterdam is the largest port in Europe, with the rivers Meuse and Rhine providing excellent access to the hinterland upstream reaching to Basel, Switzerland and into France.
The port's main activities are petrochemical industries and general cargo handling and transshipment.
Well-known streets in Rotterdam are the Lijnbaan (the first set of pedestrian streets of the country, opened in 1953), the Hoogstraat, the Coolsingel with the city hall, and the Weena, which runs from the Central Station to the Hofplein (square).
The main shopping venue in the south of Rotterdam is Zuidplein, which lies close to Rotterdam Ahoy, an accommodation center for shows, exhibitions, sporting events, concerts and congresses.
Rotterdam has one major university, the Erasmus University Rotterdam (EUR), named after one of the city's famous former inhabitants, Desiderius Erasmus.
The Willem de Kooning Academy Rotterdam's main art school, which is part of the Hogeschool Rotterdam.
The Hoboken campus of EUR houses the Dijkzigt (general) hospital, the Sophia Hospital (for children) and the Medical Department of the University.
There are also three Hogescholen (Universities of applied sciences) in Rotterdam.
As there are many international and American schools scattered across Europe such as ASH (American International School of the Hague) Rotterdam also has its own international/American school by the name AISR (American International School of Rotterdam).
Unique to the city is the Shipping & Transport College which offers masters, bachelors and vocational diplomas on all levels.
Rotterdam is well connected by international, national, regional and local public transport systems, as well as by the Dutch motorway network.
Motorways There are several motorways to/from Rotterdam.
Airport Much smaller than the international hub Schiphol Airport, Rotterdam The Hague Airport (formerly known as Zestienhoven) is the third largest airport in the country, behind Schiphol Airport and Eindhoven Airport.
The city is often mentioned as the terminus of the Eurasian Land Bridge.
Several semi-fast services and local trains originate or call at Rotterdam Centraal
Detailed information available from the site of the Nederlandse Spoorwegen (Dutch Railways)[REF] .
In 1968, Rotterdam was the first Dutch city to open a metro system.
Bus Rotterdam offers 55 city bus lines with a total length of .
RET runs buses in the city of Rotterdam and surrounding places like Spijkenisse, Barendrecht, Ridderkerk, Rhoon, Poortugaal, Schiedam, Vlaardingen, Delft and Capelle aan den IJssel.
Arriva Netherlands, Connexxion and Veolia run buses from other cities to Rotterdam.
Waterbus The Waterbus network consists of seven lines.
Alongside Porto, Rotterdam was European Capital of Culture in 2001.
Rotterdam features some urban architecture projects, nightlife, and many summer festivals celebrating the city's multicultural population and identity, such as the Caribbean-inspired "Summer Carnival", the Dance Parade, Rotterdam 666, the Metropolis pop festival and the World Port days.
There is a healthy competition with Amsterdam, which is often viewed as the cultural capital of the Netherlands.
It is also the home of Gabber, a type of hardcore electronic music popular in the mid-1990s, with hard beats and samples.
The main cultural organisations in Amsterdam, such as the Concertgebouw and Holland Festival, have joint forces with similar organisations in Rotterdam, via A'R'dam.
Other museums include the tax museum and the natural history museum.
Rotterdam calls itself Sportstad (City of Sports).
The city is also the home of many sports clubs and some historic and iconic athletes.
Rotterdam is the home of three professional football clubs, being first tier clubs Feyenoord, Excelsior and Sparta.
Feyenoord, founded in 1908 and the dominant of the three professional clubs, has won fourteen national titles since the introduction of professional football in the Netherlands.
Seating 51,480, its 1931 stadium, called Stadion Feijenoord but popularly known as De Kuip ('the Tub'), is the second largest in the country, after the Amsterdam Arena.
Sparta, founded in 1888 and situated in the northwest of Rotterdam, won the national title six times; Excelsior (founded 1902), in the northeast, has never won any.
Rotterdam also has three fourth tier clubs, SC Feijenoord (Feyenoord Amateurs), PVV DOTO and TOGR.
Rotterdam has its own annual international marathon, which offers one of the fastest courses in the world.
The marathon starts and ends on the Coolsingel in the heart of Rotterdam.
Since 1972, Rotterdam hosts the indoor hard court ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament, part of the ATP Tour.
Former Wimbledon winner Richard Krajicek became the tournament director after his retirement in 2000.
In November 2008 Rotterdam was chosen as the host of the Grand Départ of the 2010 Tour de France.
The start in Rotterdam was the fifth in the Netherlands.
Members of the student rowing club Skadi were part of the 'Holland Acht', winning a gold medal at the Olympics in 1996.
In field hockey, Rotterdam has the largest hockey club in the Netherlands, HC Rotterdam, with its own stadium in the north of the city and nearly 2,400 members.
Rotterdam is home to the most successful European baseball team, Neptunus Rotterdam, winning the most European Cups.
Rotterdam has a long boxing tradition starting with Bep van Klaveren (1907-1992), aka 'The Dutch Windmill', Gold medal winner of the 1928 Amsterdam Olympics, followed by professional boxers like Regilio Tuur and Don Diego Poeder.
Rotterdam's swimming tradition started with Marie Braun aka Zus (sister) Braun, who was coached to a Gold medal at the 1928 Amsterdam Olympics by her mother Ma Braun, and 3 European titles 3 years later in Paris.
Motor cycle speedway was staged in the Feyenoord Stadium after the second world war.
Since 1986, the city has selected its best sportsman, woman and team at the Rotterdam Sports Awards Election, held in December.
Mia Audina, a retired Indonesia born badminton player, living in Rotterdam.
Nelli Cooman, a Surinamese born retired athlete who held the 60 m dash world record, and was the world and European champion in that event.
Robert Doornbos, a Rotterdam born race car driver, who competed in the Formula One.
Robert Eenhoorn, a Rotterdam born retired MLB short stop, who competed for the New York Yankees, the Anaheim Angels and the New York Mets.
Dex Elmont, a Rotterdam born judoka, who finished second in the European championships in 2009 in the division.
Guillaume Elmont, a Rotterdam born judoka, who became world champion in 2005 in the division.
Francisco Elson, a Rotterdam born basketball player who played in the NBA, won the NBA finals in 2007 with the San Antonio Spurs.
Ignisious Gaisah, a Ghanaian born long jumper with a personal best of , residing in Rotterdam since 2001.
Francis Hoenselaar, a Rotterdam born female darts player, generally recognised as the best Dutch female darts player ever.
Robert Lathouwers, an athlete born in a Rotterdam suburb, specialised in the 800 m.
Fatima Moreira de Melo, a Rotterdam born, three-times olympic champion in field hockey.
Piet Roozenburg, a Rotterdam born draughts player, who was the world champion from 1948 to 1956 and the 8-time Dutch champion.
Betty Stöve, a Rotterdam born retired female tennis double specialist and 10-time Grand Slam winner.
Ingmar Vos, a Rotterdam born decathlete, with a personal best of 8224 points.
Child sexual abuse is outlawed nearly everywhere in the world, generally with severe criminal penalties, including in some jurisdictions, life imprisonment or capital punishment [REF].
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) is an international treaty that legally obliges states to protect children's rights.
The Council of Europe has adopted the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse in order to prohibit child sexual abuse that occurs within home or family.
In the European Union, child sexual abuse is subject to a directive [REF].
sexual exploitation - a term defining offenses in which an adult victimizes a minor for advancement, sexual gratification, or profit; for example, prostituting a child,[REF] and creating or trafficking in child pornography [REF].
sexual grooming - a term defining the social conduct of a potential child sex offender who seeks to make a minor more accepting of their advances, for example in an online chat room [REF].
Commercial sexual exploitation of children (CSEC) is defined by the Declaration of the First World Congress against Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children, held in Stockholm in 1996, as "sexual abuse by an adult accompanied by remuneration in cash or in kind to the child or third person(s)."[REF]
Offenders are more likely to be relatives or acquaintances of their victim than strangers [REF].
More offenders are male than female, though the percentage varies between studies (see female child molesters).
In U.S. schools, educators who offend range in age from "21 to 75 years old, with an average age of 28" [REF].
According to C.E. Dettmeijer-Vermeulen, Dutch national spokeswoman on human traffic and sexual violence against children, in the Netherlands, 3% of the convicted perpetrators are women,[REF] 14.58% of the victims are boys[REF] and "most victims were abused by a family member, friend or acquaintance."[REF]
Early research in the 1970s and 1980s began to classify offenders based on their motivations and traits.
Later work (Holmes and Holmes, 2002) expanded on the types of offenders and their psychological profiles.
Regressed - Typically has relationships with adults, but a stressor causes them to seek children as a substitute.
Morally Indiscriminate - All-around sexual deviant, who may commit other sexual offenses unrelated to children.
Naive/Inadequate - Often mentally disabled in some way, finds children less threatening.
Preferential - has true sexual interest in children.
Mysoped - Sadistic and violent, target strangers more often than acquaintances.
Fixated - Little or no activity with own age, described as an "overgrown child".
Causal factors of child sex offenders are not known conclusively [REF].
Offenders may use cognitive distortions to facilitate their offenses, such as minimization of the abuse, victim blaming, and excuses [REF].
Pedophilia is a condition in which an adult or older adolescent is primarily or exclusively attracted to prepubescent children, whether the attraction is acted upon or not [REF].
Recidivism rates for sex offenders are lower than for the general criminal population [REF].
When a prepubescent child is sexually abused by one or more other children or adolescent youths, and no adult is directly involved, it is defined as child-on-child sexual abuse.
Unlike research on adult offenders, a strong causal relationship has been established between child and adolescent offenders and these offenders' own prior victimization, by either adults or other children [REF].
According to a 2010 UNICEF report, 46% of Congolese schoolgirls confirmed that they had been victims of sexual harassment, abuse, and violence committed by their teachers or other school personnel [REF].
Although there is no known cure for pedophilia,[REF] there are a number of treatments for pedophiles and child sexual abusers.
The evidence for cognitive behavioral therapy is mixed [REF].
The goal of treatment is not only to treat current mental health issues, and trauma related symptoms, but also to prevent future ones.
Children often present for treatment in one of several circumstances, including criminal investigations, custody battles, problematic behaviors, and referrals from child welfare agencies [REF].
The three major modalities for therapy with children and adolescents are family therapy, group therapy, and individual therapy.
Major factors that affect both the pathology and response to treatment include the type and severity of the sexual act, its frequency, the age at which it occurred, and the child's family of origin.
Adults who have been sexually abused as children often present for treatment with a secondary mental health issue, which can include substance abuse, eating disorders, personality disorders, depression, and conflict in romantic or interpersonal relationships [REF].
Generally, the approach is to focus on the present problem, rather than the abuse itself.
Sexual abuse is associated with many sub-clinical behavioral issues as well, including re-victimization in the teenage years, a bipolar-like switching between sexual compulsion and shut-down, and distorted thinking on the subject of sexual abuse (for instance, that it is common and happens to everyone).
Based on self-disclosure data, a 2011 meta-analysis of 217 studies estimated a global prevalence of 12.7% - 18% for girls and 7.6% for boys.
A 2009 meta-analysis of 65 studies from 22 countries found a global prevalence of 19.7% for females and 7.9% for males.
A ten-country school-based study in southern Africa in 2007 found 19.6% of female students and 21.1% of male students aged 11-16 years reported they had experienced forced or coerced sex.
The prevalence of child sexual abuse in Africa is compounded by the virgin cleansing myth that sexual intercourse with a virgin will cure a man of HIV or AIDS.
Child rape is on the rise in the war ravaged eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo [REF].
A number of high-profile baby rapes appeared since 2001 (including the fact that they required extensive reconstructive surgery to rebuild urinary, genital, abdominal, or tracheal systems).
In Bangladesh, child prostitutes are known to take the drug Oradexon, an over-the-counter steroid, usually used by farmers to fatten cattle, to make child prostitutes look larger and older.
Nineteen percent of the world's children live in India,[REF][REF] which constitutes 42 percent of India's total population [REF].
In one survey, 2.5% of Taiwanese adolescents report having experienced childhood sexual abuse [REF].
Additionally, a study found that men with a history of victimization, especially having been raped or otherwise sexually coerced themselves, were more likely than otherwise to have participated in both single perpetrator and multiple perpetrator non-partner rape [REF].
Child sexual abuse occurs frequently in Western society,[REF] although the rate of prevalence can be difficult to determine [REF].
The estimates for the United States vary widely.
Surveys have shown that one fifth to one third of all women reported some sort of childhood sexual experience with a male adult [REF].
In US schools, according to the United States Department of Education,[REF] "nearly 9.6% of students are targets of educator sexual misconduct sometime during their school career."
Significant underreporting of sexual abuse of boys by both women and men is believed to occur due to sex stereotyping, social denial, the minimization of male victimization, and the relative lack of research on sexual abuse of boys [REF].
Incest between a child or adolescent and a related adult is known as child incestuous abuse,[REF] and has been identified as the most widespread form of child sexual abuse with a huge capacity to damage the young person [REF].
The most-often reported form of incest is father-daughter and stepfather-daughter incest, with most of the remaining reports consisting of mother/stepmother-daughter/son incest [REF].
Prevalence of parental child sexual abuse is difficult to assess due to secrecy and privacy
Child sexual abuse can result in both short-term and long-term harm, including psychopathology in later life [REF].
A well-documented, long-term negative effect is the repeated or additional victimization in adolescence and adulthood [REF].
A specific characteristic pattern of symptoms has not been identified,[REF] and there are several hypotheses about the causality of these associations [REF].
Studies have found that 51% to 79% of sexually abused children exhibit psychological symptoms [REF].
Child abuse, including sexual abuse, especially chronic abuse starting at early ages, has been found to be related to the development of high levels of dissociative symptoms, which includes amnesia for abuse memories [REF].
Besides dissociative identity disorder (DID) and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), child sexual abuse survivors may present borderline personality disorder (BPD) and eating disorders such as bulimia nervosa [REF].
Because child sexual abuse often occurs alongside other possibly confounding variables, such as poor family environment and physical abuse,[REF] some scholars argue it is important to control for those variables in studies which measure the effects of sexual abuse [REF].
Kendler et al. (2000) found that most of the relationship between severe forms of child sexual abuse and adult psychopathology in their sample could not be explained by family discord, because the effect size of this association decreased only slightly after they controlled for possible confounding variables.
Depending on the age and size of the child, and the degree of force used, child sexual abuse may cause internal lacerations and bleeding.
Child sexual abuse may cause infections and sexually transmitted diseases [REF].
Research has shown that traumatic stress, including stress caused by sexual abuse, causes notable changes in brain functioning and development [REF].
Some studies indicate that sexual or physical abuse in children can lead to the overexcitation of an undeveloped limbic system [REF].
Navalta et al. (2006) found that the self-reported math Scholastic Aptitude Test scores of their sample of women with a history of repeated child sexual abuse were significantly lower than the self-reported math SAT scores of their non-abused sample.
Children who received supportive responses following disclosure had less traumatic symptoms and were abused for a shorter period of time than children who did not receive support [REF].
The American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry provides guidelines for what to say to the victim and what to do following the disclosure [REF].
In many jurisdictions, abuse that is suspected, not necessarily proven, requires reporting to child protection agencies, such as the Child Protection Services in the United States.
Child sexual abuse has gained public attention in the past few decades and has become one of the most high-profile crimes.
Child sexual abuse became a public issue in the 1970s and 1980s.
Second wave feminism brought greater awareness of child sexual abuse and violence against women, and made them public, political issues [REF].
In 1986, Congress passed the Child Abuse Victims' Rights Act, giving children a civil claim in sexual abuse cases.
Anne Hastings described these changes in attitudes towards child sexual abuse as "the beginning of one of history's largest social revolutions."[REF] .
In the United States growing awareness of child sexual abuse has sparked an increasing number of civil lawsuits for monetary damages stemming from such incidents.
A 2000 World Health Organization - Geneva report, "World Report on Violence and Health (Chap 6 - Sexual Violence)" states, "Action in schools is vital for reducing sexual and other forms of violence.
In March 2011 Europol, the European Police, in a mission called Operation Rescue, arrested 184 alleged members out of 670 identified, of an online paedophile ring and rescued 230 children which is considered as the biggest case of its kind [REF].
In 2010 five men of Pakistani heritage were found guilty for sexual offences which occurred between 1997 and 2013 in the UK town of Rotherham.
Wetlands are an important part of the Reno/Tahoe area.
The Truckee River serves as Reno's primary source of drinking water.
The Reno-Sparks wastewater treatment plant discharges tertiary treated effluent to the Truckee River.
Reno is situated just east of the Sierra Nevada on the western edge of the Great Basin at an elevation of about above sea level.
In February 2008, an earthquake swarm began to occur, lasting for several months, and with the largest quake registering at 4.9 on the Richter magnitude scale, although some geologic estimates put it at 5.0.
Reno sits in the rain shadow of the Sierra Nevada mountain range.
Most rainfall occurs in winter and spring.
The monthly daily average temperature ranges from in December to in July, with the diurnal temperature variation reaching in summer, still lower than much of the high desert to the east.
As of the census of 2010, there were 225,221 people, 90,924 households, and 51,112 families residing in the city.
At the 2010 census, there were 90,924 households, out of which 29.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.4% were headed by married couples living together, 11.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 43.8% were non-families.
In the city, the 2010 population was spread out with 22.8% under the age of 18, 12.5% from 18 to 24, 28.2% from 25 to 44, 24.9% from 45 to 64, and 11.7% who were 65 years of age or older.
In 2011 the estimated median income for a household in the city was $44,846, and the median income for a family was $53,896.
Before the late 1950s, Reno was the gambling capital of the United States, but in the last twenty years Las Vegas' rapid growth, American Airlines' 2000 buyout of Reno Air, and the growth of Native American gaming in California have reduced its business.
Because of its location, Reno has traditionally drawn the majority of its California tourists and gamblers from the San Francisco Bay Area and Sacramento, while Las Vegas has historically served more tourists from Southern California and the Phoenix area.
Several local large hotel casinos have shown significant growth and have moved gaming further away from the Virginia Street core.
In an effort to bring more tourism to the area, Reno holds several events throughout the year, most of which have been extremely successful.
Several large commercial developments were constructed during the mid-2000s boom, such as The Summit in 2007 and Legends at Sparks Marina in 2008.
Reno is the location of the corporate headquarters for numerous companies, including Braeburn Capital, Hamilton, EE Technologies, and Port of Subs.
Reno is home to a variety of recreation activities including both seasonal and year-round.
Skiing and snowboarding are among the most popular winter sports and draw in many tourists.
The Reno Air Races, also known as the National Championship Air Races, are held each September at the Reno Stead Airport [REF].
Reno has a democratic municipal government.
There is an elected city attorney who is responsible for civil and criminal cases.
The city's charter calls for a council-manager form of government, meaning that the council appoints only two positions, the city manager, who implements and enforces the policies and programs the council approves, and the city clerk.
In 2010, there was a ballot question asking whether the Reno city government and the Washoe County government should explore the idea of becoming one combined governmental body [REF].
The city of Reno is protected by the Truckee Meadows Fire Protection District (TMFPD) manning 14 fire stations [REF].
The University of Nevada, Reno is the oldest university in the state of Nevada and Nevada System of Higher Education.
Truckee Meadows Community College (TMCC) is a regionally accredited, two-year institution which is part of the Nevada System of Higher Education.
Career College of Northern Nevada (CCNN) is a nationally accredited trade school that trains students in technical fields that support fast growing industries.
University of Phoenix - Northern Nevada Campus is located in south Reno.
The Nevada School of Law at Old College in Reno was the first law school established in the state of Nevada.
Public education is provided by the Washoe County School District.
Reno has a few private elementary schools such as Legacy Christian School, Excel Christian School, Lamplight Christian School, Coral Academy of Science,[REF] and Nevada Sage Waldorf School[REF] as well as private high schools, the largest of which are Bishop Manogue High School[REF] and Sage Ridge School [REF].
Reno was historically served by the Victory Highway and a branch of the Lincoln Highway.
The Regional Transportation Commission of Washoe County (RTC) has a bus system that provides intracity buses, intercity buses to Carson City, and an on-demand shuttle service for disabled persons [REF].
Greyhound and Silver State Trailways stop at a downtown terminal.
Reno was historically a stopover along the First Transcontinental Railroad
Amtrak provides daily passenger service to Reno via the California Zephyr and multiple Amtrak Thruway Motorcoaches connecting to trains departing from Sacramento.
The city is served by Reno-Tahoe International Airport, with general aviation traffic handled by Reno Stead Airport.
Potable water for the city of Reno is provided by the Truckee Meadows Water Authority.
Sewage treatment for the majority of the Truckee Meadows region takes place at the Truckee Meadows Water Reclamation Facility at the eastern edge of the valley.
Electrical power and natural gas are provided by NV Energy, formerly Sierra Pacific.
Archaeological finds place the eastern border for the prehistoric Martis people in the Reno area [REF].
As early as the mid 1850s a few pioneers settled in the Truckee Meadows, a relatively fertile valley through which the Truckee River made its way from Lake Tahoe to Pyramid Lake.
Gold was discovered in the vicinity of Virginia City in 1850, and a modest mining community developed, but the discovery of silver in 1859 at the Comstock Lode led to a mining rush.
By January 1863, the Central Pacific Railroad (CPRR) had begun laying tracks east from Sacramento, California, eventually connecting with the Union Pacific Railroad at Promontory, Utah, to form the First Transcontinental Railroad.
In 1871, Reno became the county seat of the newly expanded Washoe County, replacing the previous county seat, located in Washoe City.
The extension of the Virginia and Truckee Railroad to Reno in 1872 provided a boost to the new city's economy.
The "Reno Arch" was erected on Virginia Street in 1926 to promote the upcoming Transcontinental Highways Exposition of 1927.
Reno took a leap when the state of Nevada legalized open-gambling on March 19, 1931, along with the passage of even more liberal divorce laws than places like Hot Springs, Arkansas, offered.
Within a few years, the Bank Club, owned by George Wingfield, Bill Graham, and Jim McKay, was the state's largest employer and the largest casino in the world.
Ernie Pyle once wrote in one of his columns, "All the people you saw on the streets in Reno were obviously there to get divorces."
The divorce business eventually died as the other states fell in line by passing their own laws easing the requirements for divorce, but gambling continued as a major Reno industry.
A disaster occurred on the afternoon of February 5, 1957, when an explosion ripped through the heart of downtown.
The presence of a main east-west rail line, the emerging interstate highway system, favorable state tax climate, and relatively inexpensive land created good conditions for warehousing and distribution of goods.
In the 1980s, Indian gaming rules were relaxed, and starting in 2000, Californian Native casinos began to cut into casino revenues [REF].
In more recent years, the city has gained some notoriety as the subject of the comedy series Reno 911! (the main scenes of which, however, are filmed in the city of Carson, California) [REF].
On May 9, 2014, the Reno Historical App[REF] was released in conjunction with the city's celebration of its 111th birthday as an incorporated city.
Washoe County Library System has locations throughout Reno and its surrounding communities.
The young adult author Ellen Hopkins has written a series of novels called Crank set in Reno.
American songwriter Richard Fariña composed a song named Reno Nevada
Thomas Dolby composed a song named "Road to Reno" as part of his A Map of the Floating City album, released in 2011.
Reno is home to the Reno Aces, the minor league baseball Triple-A affiliate of the Arizona Diamondbacks, playing in Greater Nevada Field, a downtown ballpark opened in 2009.
In basketball, the Reno Bighorns, who joined the NBA Development League in 2008, play at the Reno Events Center [REF].
Reno is host to both amateur and professional combat sporting events such as mixed martial arts and boxing.
The Reno Barons, an independent professional indoor football team, played at the Reno Events Center in 2011.
Reno expected to be the future home of an ECHL ice hockey team, named the Reno Raiders, but construction on a suitable arena never began.
The Reno-Tahoe Open is northern Nevada's only PGA Tour event, held at Montrêux Golf & Country Club in Reno.
Reno has a college sports scene, with the Nevada Wolf Pack appearing in football bowl games and an Associated Press Top Ten ranking in basketball in 2007.
In 2004, the city completed a $1.5 million whitewater park on the Truckee River in downtown Reno which hosts whitewater events throughout the year.
Reno is home to two roller derby teams, the Battle Born Derby Demons and the Reno Roller Girls [REF].
Reno is the home of the National Bowling Stadium, which hosts the United States Bowling Congress (USBC) Open Championships every three years.
Beginning in 1996, Voodoo evolved from nearly four years of sessions and featured an extensive roster of R&B, hip hop, and jazz musicians and recording technicians [REF].
During the initial recording sessions, D'Angelo also worked with personal trainer Mark Jenkins, who was hired to help him get into shape [REF].
Following the birth of his son, D'Angelo composed the album's first song "Send It On" in 1998 at a recording studio in Virginia.
Production for the album was conducted in a generally informal manner and took place at Electric Lady Studios simultaneously with recording for Erykah Badu's Mama's Gun (2000) and Common's Like Water for Chocolate (2000) [REF].
D'Angelo produced songs on Common's Like Water for Chocolate [REF].
Questlove was the "musical powerhouse" behind several of the Soulquarians' projects during the late 1990s and early 2000s, including Voodoo and Things Fall Apart [REF].
According to Questlove, a duet track by D'Angelo and Lauryn Hill, "Feel Like Makin' Love", was planned [REF].
During the final days of recording Voodoo, Questlove spent time recording a version of Fela Kuti's "Water No Get Enemy", a melodic protest song from Kuti's 1975 album Expensive Shit [REF].
Following the success of his debut album Brown Sugar (1995), D'Angelo went into a four and a half year absence from the music scene and releasing solo work [REF].
After spending two years on tour promoting Brown Sugar, D'Angelo found himself stuck with writer's block [REF].
In 1998, he was inspired to write music again after the birth of his first child, Michael, with fellow R&B singer and then-girlfriend Angie Stone [REF].
In a February 1999 interview with music journalist Touré, D'Angelo discussed the album and elaborated on the events that had preceded its release, explaining how he had no initial plan for a follow-up [REF].
Audio engineer Russell Elevado, who recorded and mixed Voodoo, along with Erykah Badu's Mama's Gun and Common's Like Water for Chocolate, used old school recording techniques and vintage mixing gear for the albums in order to achieve the distinct sounds found in classic recorded works [REF].
For Voodoos sessions, D'Angelo appropriated most of the instruments on the album's songs, contributing with drums, electric guitar, keyboards, and percussion [REF].
D'Angelo composed all of the bass lines for Voodoo and sequenced them for Welsh bassist Pino Palladino, who he had met after being asked to do a duet with B.B. King at the time of Voodoos earlier sessions [REF].
D'Angelo and his supporting personnel constructed several of the songs' grooves for the album to sit far behind time, directly on top of time, or pressing on the time, making them cluttered and loose in style [REF].
One of the characteristics of the drumming style implemented in recording the album is its adherence to human timing, as the tracks were mostly programmed mechanically during recording, therefore resulting in the album's intentional sloppiness [REF].
Questlove also acknowledged J Dilla's influence over the recording sessions for Voodoo [REF].
Voodoo incorporates musical elements of jazz, funk, hip hop, blues, and soul,[REF] as well as ambient music with a musical layer shaped by guitar-based funk [REF].
The album features aggressive multi-tracking of D'Angelo's voice, a technique similar to the production of Sly & the Family Stone's There's a Riot Goin' On (1971) and Marvin Gaye's Let's Get It On (1973) [REF].
D'Angelo and his crew also utilized a hip hop production style, which often subordinates song structure to a stable foundation for a rapper's delivery and flow [REF].
Following Voodoos release, D'Angelo embarked on his second international tour in support of the album, The Voodoo Tour.
D'Angelo's wardrobe during the tour included tank tops, black leather pants, and boots [REF].
With ticket prices ranging from $49 to $79,[REF] the tour became one of the most attended shows of 2000 [REF].
The music video for "Untitled (How Does It Feel)" portrayed D'Angelo as a sex symbol to mainstream music audiences, which had repercussions on The Voodoo Tours second half [REF].
I mean, everyone's insecure, but he's insecure to the level where I felt as though I had to lose myself and play cheerleader.
In the same interview, Questlove also said that he had not been fully compensated for his work on Voodoo, stating "I didn't get the rest of my check."[REF]
D'Angelo was dissatisfied with the direction of R&B and soul music when conceiving the album [REF].
Producer and drummer Ahmir "Questlove" Thompson issued an essay in 1999 that discussed the album's creation and analyzed its songs [REF].
In an interview for USA Today, D'Angelo said of the album's title and its meaning, "the myriad influences found on it can be traced through the blues and back deeper in history through songs sung-in religious [voodoo] ceremonies."[REF]
The opening track "Playa Playa" features basketball metaphors and gospel overtones,[REF] which accompany the track's slow funk and jazz vibe [REF].
"Left & Right" is a funky party jam featuring rappers Method Man and Redman, who exchange verses as D'Angelo sings the song's verses and chorus [REF].
The sparse funk song "Chicken Grease" has lyrics advising against acting "uptight",[REF][REF] and it features D'Angelo referencing the line "I know you got soul" from Eric B. & Rakim's song of the same name (1987) [REF].
According to Questlove, "The Root", "Spanish Joint", and "Greatdayindamornin'" serve as the "virtuoso part of the record", featuring intricate technical arrangements,[REF] no overdubbing, and Charlie Hunter playing both electric and bass guitar [REF].
Co-written by Raphael Saadiq, "Untitled (How Does It Feel)" is a tribute to one of D'Angelo's primary influences, Prince, and evokes his early Controversy period [REF].
The philosophical album closer "Africa" celebrates D'Angelo's heritage, while reaffirming his contemporary mission in life [REF].
The album's release was preceded by several delays, which were primarily caused by the folding of D'Angelo's former label EMI Records and legal troubles with his management [REF].
By the album's release date, three singles had been released, "Devil's Pie", "Left & Right", and "Untitled (How Does It Feel)", with only the latter making a significant commercial impact [REF].
A press release for Voodoo was issued in January, discussing the album's experimental edge and the anticipation for its release.
The release of the controversial "Untitled (How Does It Feel)" music video prior to the album's release has often been cited as having the greatest promotional impact [REF].
Voodoo received rave reviews from contemporary music critics,[REF] who dubbed it a "masterpiece" and D'Angelo's greatest work [REF].
As most jazz aficionados will already attest to, a truly classic record is not one you can turn on and off as if it were only a switch.
However, some critics found it inconsistent [REF].
The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart,[REF] selling 320,000 copies in its first week [REF].
Despite its success, Voodoo did not achieve his debut album's sales performance nor generate the single-oriented success D'Angelo's label had envisioned [REF].
The album's third single, "Untitled (How Does It Feel)", became its greatest chart success, peaking at number 25 on the Hot 100 Singles and at number two on the R&B Singles chart [REF].
In January 2009, Morgan Tsvangirai announced that he would do as the leaders across Africa had insisted and join a coalition government as prime minister with his nemesis, President Robert Mugabe [REF].
In 2013 the Mugabe government won an election which The Economist described as "rigged,"[REF] doubled the size of the civil service and embarked on "..misrule and dazzling corruption."[REF] .
By 2016 the economy had collapsed, nationwide protests took place throughout the country[REF] and the finance minister admitted "Right now we literally have nothing."[REF] .
Zimbabwe held a presidential election along with a 2008 parliamentary election of 29 March [REF].
Because of Zimbabwe's dire economic situation the election was expected to provide President Mugabe with his toughest electoral challenge to date.
No official results were announced for more than a month after the first round [REF].
After the recount and the verification of the results, the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC) announced on 2 May that Tsvangirai won 47.9% and Mugabe won 43.2%, thereby necessitating a run-off,[REF] which was to be held on 27 June 2008 [REF].
The international reaction to the second round have varied.
On 15 September 2008, the leaders of the 14-member Southern African Development Community witnessed the signing of the power-sharing agreement, brokered by South African leader Thabo Mbeki.
In November 2008 the Air Force of Zimbabwe was sent, after some police officers began refusing orders to shoot the illegal miners at Marange diamond fields [REF].
The country gained official independence as Zimbabwe on 18 April 1980.
President Shagari pledged $15 million at the celebration to train Zimbabweans in Zimbabwe and expatriates in Nigeria.
Mugabe's government changed the capital's name from Salisbury to Harare on 18 April 1982 in celebration of the second anniversary of independence [REF].
The new Constitution provided for a non-executive President as Head of State with a Prime Minister as Head of Government.
Prime Minister Mugabe kept Peter Walls, the head of the army, in his government and put him in charge of integrating the Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA), Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army (ZANLA), and the Rhodesian Army.
Minister of Information Nathan Shamuyarira said the government would not be "held ransom by racial misfits" and told "all those Europeans who do not accept the new order to pack their bags."
Ethnic divisions soon came back to the forefront of national politics.
Because of the unsettled security situation immediately after independence and democratic sentiments, the government kept in force a "state of emergency".
ZANU-PF increased its majority in the 1985 elections, winning 67 of the 100 seats.
Elections in March 1990 resulted in another overwhelming victory for Mugabe and his party, which won 117 of the 120 election seats.
During the 1990s students, trade unionists, and workers often demonstrated to express their discontent with the government.
On 9 December 1997 a national strike paralysed the country.
Although many whites had left Zimbabwe after independence, mainly for neighbouring South Africa, those who remained continued to wield disproportionate control of some sectors of the economy, especially agriculture.
The economy was run along corporatist lines with strict governmental controls on all aspects of the economy.
Prior to the arrival of Bantu speakers in present-day Zimbabwe the region was populated by ancestors of the San people who were present in the region when the first Bantu-speaking farmers arrived during the Bantu expansion around 2000 years ago [REF].
These Bantu speakers were the makers of early Iron Age pottery belonging to the Silver Leaves or Matola tradition, third to fifth centuries A.D.,[REF] found in southeast Zimbabwe.
A later phase of the Gokomere culture was the Zhizo in southern Zimbabwe.
Pottery belonging to a western stream of Bantu expansion (sometimes called Kalundu) has been found at sites in northeastern Zimbabwe, dated from the seventh century [REF].
The evidence that the ancestral Shona speakers came from South Africa is that the ceramic styles associated with Shona speakers in Zimbabwe from the thirteenth to the seventeenth centuries can be traced back to western stream (Kalunndu) pottery styles in South Africa.
Although the western stream Kalundu tradition was ancestral to Shona ceramic wares, the closest relationships of the ancestral Shona language according to many linguists[REF][REF][REF][REF][REF] were with a southern division of eastern Bantu - such languages as the southeastern languages (Nguni, Sotho-Tswana, Tsonga), Nyasa and Makwa.
After the Shona speaking people moved into the present day Zimbabwe many different dialects developed over time in the different parts of the country.
It is believed that Kalanga speaking societies first emerged in the middle Limpopo valley in the 9th century before moving on to the Zimbabwean highlands.
After losing their remaining South African lands in 1840, Mzilikazi and his tribe permanently settled the southwest of present-day Zimbabwe in what became known as Matabeleland, establishing Bulawayo as their capital.
However, Zimbabwe began experiencing a period of considerable political and economic upheaval in 1999.
The MDC's first opportunity to test opposition to the Mugabe government came in February 2000, when a referendum was held on a draft constitution proposed by the government.
Parliamentary elections held in June 2000 were marred by localised violence, and claims of electoral irregularities and government intimidation of opposition supporters .
In August 2006 runaway inflation forced the government to replace its existing currency with a revalued one.
Morgan Tsvangirai was badly beaten on 12 March 2007 after being arrested and held at Machipisa Police Station in the Highfield suburb of Harare.
The economy has shrunk by 50% from 2000 to 2007.
The country used to be one of Africa's richest and is now one of its poorest.
The regime has managed to cling to power by creating wealthy enclaves for government ministers, and senior party members.
Zimbabwe's bakeries shut down in October 2007 and supermarkets warned that they would have no bread for the foreseeable future due to collapse in wheat production after the seizure of white-owned farms.
On 8 December 2007, Mugabe attended a meeting of EU and African leaders in Lisbon, prompting UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown to decline to attend.
The educational system in Zimbabwe which was once regarded as among the best in Africa, has gone into crisis because of the country's economic meltdown.
Divisions within the opposition MDC had begun to fester early in the decade, after Morgan Tsvangirai (the president of the MDC) was lured into a government sting operation that videotaped him talking of Mr. Mugabe's removal from power.
An internal party inquiry later established that aides to Tsvangirai had tolerated, if not endorsed, the violence.
As Senate elections approached further opposition splits occurred.
In May 2005 the government began Operation Murambatsvina.
Human Rights Watch said the evictions had disrupted treatment for people with HIV/Aids in a country where 3,000 die from the disease each week and about 1.3 million children have been orphaned.
In September 2005 Mugabe signed constitutional amendments that reinstituted a national senate (abolished in 1987) and that nationalised all land.
In the 1880s, the British arrived with Cecil Rhodes's British South Africa Company.
The Shona staged unsuccessful revolts (known as Chimurenga) against encroachment upon their lands, by clients of BSAC and Cecil Rhodes in 1896 and 1897.
Southern Rhodesia became a self-governing British colony in October 1923, subsequent to a 1922 referendum.
In 1953, in the face of African opposition,[REF] Britain consolidated the two colonies of Rhodesia with Nyasaland (now Malawi) in the ill-fated Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland which was dominated by Southern Rhodesia.
This was the style of the eldest surviving daughter of the king.
Princess Christine Marie of France (1606-1663), the second daughter of Henry IV and Marie de' Medici.
Princess Marie-Thérèse of France (1667-1672), the only daughter of Louis XIV and his queen to live beyond infancy.
Princess Marie Louise Élisabeth of France (1727-1759), eldest daughter of Louis XV and his queen, Maria Leszczyńska (1703-1768).
Princess Marie-Thérèse of France (1746-1748) eldest daughter of Louis, Dauphin of France (1729-1765) and his first wife Infanta Maria Teresa Rafaela of Spain (1726-1746).
Princess Marie-Thérèse Charlotte of France, eldest daughter of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette.
Between the death, in 1672, of Marie-Thérèse of France, the longest living daughter of Louis XIV and his Queen, and the birth, in 1727, of Louise Élisabeth of France, the eldest daughter of Louis XV, there were no legitimate daughters of a French king.
Petit-fils de France ("Grandson of France").
The petits-enfants de France, like the enfants de France, were entitled to be addressed as son altesse royale ("His/Her Royal Highness").
Yet as hosts, they only offered armchairs to foreign monarchs-whom they addressed as Monseigneur rather than "Sire".
When entering a town, they were greeted with a presentation of arms by the royal garrison, by the firing of cannon, and by a delegation of local officials.
This was the style of the wife of Monsieur.
Marguerite of Lorraine (1615-1672), second wife of Gaston.
Henrietta of England (1644-1670), the first wife of King Louis XIV's younger brother, Philippe, Duke of Orléans, (Monsieur).
Elisabeth Charlotte, Princess Palatine (1652-1722), the second wife of Philippe I, duc d'Orléans (Monsieur).
Marie Joséphine of Savoy (1753-1810), wife of the Count of Provence, the future Louis XVIII.
This was a form of address for the dauphin.
Louis de France, (1682-1712), son of the preceding, who became the dauphin in 1711, was informally known as le Petit Dauphin [REF].
This was another way of addressing Le Grand Dauphin, the only legitimate son of Louis XIV.
This was the style of the dynastic wife of the dauphin.
Infanta Maria Teresa Rafaela of Spain (1726-1746), first wife of Louis (1729-1765), the only son of Louis XV, and held the style till her death at age twenty-one.
Duchess Maria Josefa of Saxony (1731-1767), second wife of the Dauphin Louis, and mother of Louis XVI (1754-1793), Louis XVIII (1755-1824) and Charles X (1757-1836).
Archduchess Maria Antonia Josepha Johanna of Austria, Marie Antoinette was the dauphine until her husband succeeded to the throne in 1774 as Louis XVI.
Princess Marie-Thérèse Charlotte of France (1778-1851); daughter of Louis XVI and Marie-Antoinette, known as Madame Royale, she became the last Dauphine of France when her father-in-law, Charles X, succeeded to the throne in 1824.
This style was usually held by the eldest daughter of Monsieur and his wife, Madame [REF].
Anne Marie Louise d'Orléans (1627-1693), the eldest daughter of Gaston de France.
Marie Louise d'Orléans (1662-1689), the eldest daughter of King Louis XIV's younger brother, Philippe I, duc d'Orléans; later the wife of King Charles II of Spain.
Anne Marie d'Orléans (1669-1728) held the style (along with Madame Royale) after the marriage of her sister Marie Louise.
Élisabeth Charlotte d'Orléans (1674-1744), youngest child of Philippe I, duc d'Orléans and his second wife.
Louise Anne de Bourbon (1695-1758), fourth child of Louis III, Prince of Condé, was given the style of Mademoiselle as her cousin Louis d'Orléans had no daughter.
Louise Marie d'Orléans (1726-1728), only daughter of Louis d'Orléans and his wife Margravine Auguste Marie Johanna of Baden-Baden; died in childhood.
Louise Marie Thérèse Bathilde d'Orléans (1750-1822), daughter of the Duke of Orléans, was known as Mademoiselle from her birth.
Sophie d'Artois (1776-1783) was the first daughter of Princess Maria Theresa of Savoy (1756-1805) and her husband, born Charles Philippe of France (1757-1836).
Younger daughters of Monsieur were named after one of his appanages, e.g.
This custom was not confined to the royal family.
King Louis XV and his wife, Marie Leszczyńska, had ten children, eight of whom were girls.
Princess Marie Louise Élisabeth (1727-1759), twin with her younger sister, Henriette; married Philip, Duke of Parma (1720-1765), who was also an infante of Spain.
Princess Henriette Anne (1727-1752), twin with her older sister, Louise-Élisabeth, known as Madame Seconde.
Princess Marie Louise (1728-1733), known as Madame Troisième.
Princess Marie Adélaïde (1732-1800), originally known as Madame Quatrième; after her elder sister died in 1733, she was known as Madame Troisième.
Princess Louise Marie Thérèse Victoire (1733-1799), originally known as Madame Quatrième, and later as Madame Victoire.
Princess Sophie Philippine Élisabeth Justine (1734-1782), Madame Cinquième, known later as Madame Sophie.
Princess Marie Thérèse Félicité (1736-1744), known as Madame Sixième.
Princess Louise (1737-1787), originally, known as Madame Septième or Madame Dernière; known later as Madame Louise.
Under the Valois monarchs, the titles borne by the sons of kings became regularized.
John II made his eldest son Duke of Normandy, and his younger sons dukes of Anjou, Berry, and Burgundy.
The Bourbon kings followed the traditional titling, with Berry used for the third son.
The king, queen, queen dowager, enfants de France (Children of France) and petits-enfants de France (Grandchildren of France) constituted the famille du roi (Royal Family) [REF].
The dauphin, the heir to the French throne, was the most senior of the fils de France and was usually addressed as Monsieur le dauphin [REF].
Daughters were referred to by their given name prefaced with the honorific Madame, while sons were referred to by their main peerage title (usually ducal), with the exception of the dauphin.
All enfants de France were entitled to the style of Royal Highness (altesse royale) from the reign of Louis XIII [REF].
William M. Burton applied for the patent of the thermal cracking process that he had invented, which greatly increased the amount of gasoline that could be developed from crude oil.
Sir Francis May, recently appointed as the British Governor of Hong Kong, escaped an assassination attempt.
Sixteen miners were killed and six injured in an explosion at the Osterfeld colliery near Oberhausen in Germany [REF].
The Turkish Air Academy was founded as the Ottoman Empire began training its own pilots and flight officers [REF].
Nicaragua's Minister of War, General Luis Mena, brought rebel troops into the capital, Managua, in an attempt to overthrow President Adolfo Díaz.
An assassination attempt was made against Hassam Bey, leader of the Albanian rebellion against the Ottoman Empire, while he was in Uskub [REF].
The first National Conference of American Newspaper and Magazine Writers opened at Madison, Wisconsin [REF].
Evacuation of American women and children from the four Mormon colonies in Mexico at Chihuahua state, was ordered by the senior Mormon official, Junius Romney.
Bonar Law, conservative Leader of the Opposition in the U.K. Parliament, declared in a speech that, "We regard the Government as a revolutionary committee which has seized by fraud upon domestic power..
The Turkish cabinet announced that it would investigate the grievances of its citizens in Northern Albania and that armed force would not be used against them [REF].
The United States Senate voted 55-28 to remove William Lorimer from his post as U.S. Senator from Illinois, after determining that his election by the Illinois Senate had been secured by corruption [REF].
The weekly newspaper Al-Hilal, published by Indian Muslim activist Abul Kalam Azad to persuade Urdu-speaking Muslims to join in the move to gain independence from the United Kingdom, made its first appearance [REF].
Dr. Théodore Tuffier, a surgeon in France, performed the first successful surgery for aortic stenosis on a human patient, an unidentified man from Belgium.
The full length silent film Les Amours de la reine Élisabeth, starring world-famous stage actress Sarah Bernhardt, was released in the United States as Queen Elizabeth, with title cards in English [REF].
Mexican rebels under the command of a Colonel Arriola marched into Colonia Diaz, one of the American Mormon colonies in Mexico, and gave the American colonists there 24 hours to surrender all weapons.
The city of Point Tupper, Nova Scotia was destroyed by fire [REF].
Eugene W. Chafin was nominated for President by the Prohibition Party at its convention in Atlantic City, New Jersey.
Near the Persian city of Ardabil a Russian military column consisting of a squadron of cossacks and a few mountain artillery guns attacked a village supporting the former Shah.
The Woolworth Building in New York City became the world's tallest skyscraper, at 792 feet, with the driving in of the final rivet to its steel frame, and would be completed by April 1, 1913 [REF].
The French Chamber of Deputies voted 460-79 to approve the protectorate over Morocco [REF].
The first payroll deductions under the British unemployment insurance act were taken, with the first benefits to be paid on January 1, 1913 [REF].
The British Copyright Act 1911 went into effect [REF].
A new law went into effect in Egypt, making all ancient artifacts there property of the State.
Russian ethnologist Shloyme Ansky, with the backing of philanthropist Goratsii Gintsburg (Horace Günzburg), launched the Jewish Ethnographic Expedition, that collected and preserved thousands of Jewish artifacts in Russia until the outbreak of World War One [REF].
The International Olympic Committee voted to hold the 1916 Summer Olympics in Berlin, rejecting a bid from Budapest.
The new 48-star American flag was first raised proclaimed as the symbol of the United States, and would continue to be used for forty-seven years, until July 4, 1959, when replaced by a 49 star banner.
Heavyweight boxing champion Jack Johnson successfully defended his title against white challenger "Fireman Jim Flynn" in East Las Vegas, New Mexico.
Lightweight boxing champ Ad Wolgast fought challenger "Mexican Joe Rivers" in Los Angeles.
French cyclist Gabriel Poulain won a contest for human powered flight by remaining at least 10 centimeters off of the ground for 3.6 meters, slightly less than 12 feet [REF].
The first film serial was released to American theaters.
Creation of a naval wing of the British Royal Flying Corps was approved in Council [REF].
Edward J. Flanagan, 26, was ordained as a priest of the Roman Catholic Church after completing his studies at the University of Innsbruck in Austria.
The first Automat in New York City, providing fast food to customers in a self-service format, was opened by Horn & Hardart at 1557 Broadway in Times Square.
Magician and escape artist Harry Houdini performed his most dangerous stunt up to that time.
A dynamite explosion in Rancagua, Chile, killed 38 people [REF].
Pitcher Rube Marquard's winning streak was halted at 19 consecutive games, as his New York Giants lost to the Chicago Cubs, 7-2 [REF].
The Portuguese city of Chaves was bombarded by rebels under the command of Captain Henrique Mitchell de Paiva Couceiro, seeking to restore the monarchy, until the city was rescued by government troops [REF].
The Ottoman Empire's Minister of War, Mahmud Shevket Pasha, resigned after the fall of Tripoli to Italian troops, and an uprising in the Krujë District in the Empire's Albanian territory [REF].
The Free State of Ikaria was declared on the small island near the coast of Turkey, as its predominantly Greek inhabitants broke away from the Ottoman Empire.
Ottoman Grand Vizier Mehmed Said Pasha resigned along with his cabinet, after a revolt in the Turkish Army against the Young Turks organization [REF].
The House of Representatives voted in favor of splitting the U.S. Department of Commerce and Labor into two different departments [REF].
William Massey became the 19th Prime Minister of New Zealand after Thomas Mackenzie resigned [REF].
The French Chamber of Deputies approved the Electoral Reform Bill, setting proportional representation within the Chamber, by a margin of 330-217 [REF].
The German Army was sent to New Guinea on a punitive expedition against the natives who had killed colonial representative Petersen [REF].
The Reconquista was a process not only of war and conquest, but also of repopulation.
The presura referred to a group of peasants who crossed the mountains and settled in the abandoned lands of the Douro Basin.
During the 10th century and onwards, cities and towns gained more importance and power, as commerce reappeared and the population kept growing.
From the mid-13th century on, no more charters were granted, as the demographic pressure had disappeared and other means of re-population were created.
Real, legendary, and fictional episodes from the Reconquista are the subject of much of medieval Galician-Portuguese, Spanish, and Catalan literature such as the cantar de gesta.
Some noble genealogies show the close relations (although not very numerous) between Muslims and Christians.
After his father's death, Sanchuelo/Abd al-Rahman, as a son of a Christian princess, was a strong contender to take over the ultimate power in Muslim al-Andalus.
The Reconquista was a war with long periods of respite between the adversaries, partly for pragmatic reasons and also due to infighting among the Christian kingdoms of the North spanning over seven centuries.
A 2016 study found that the manner of the Reconquest has persistent effects on the Spanish economy to this day [REF].
In an atmosphere of constant conflict, warfare and daily life were strongly intertwined during this period.
Iberian cavalry tactics involved knights approaching the enemy, throwing javelins, then withdrawing to a safe distance before commencing another assault.
The peones were peasants who went to battle in service of their feudal lord.
Armour was typically made of leather, with iron scales; full coats of chain mail were extremely rare and horse barding completely unknown.
Steel swords were the most common weapon.
Finally, mercenaries were an important factor, as many kings did not have enough soldiers available.
This style of warfare remained dominant in the Iberian Peninsula until the late 11th century, when couched lance tactics entered from France, although the traditional horse javelin-shot techniques continued to be used.
Shields were round or triangular, made of wood, covered with leather, and protected by an iron band; the shields of knights and nobles would bear the family's coat of arms.
Traditional historiography, especially Spanish scholarship, has stressed since the 19th century the existence of the Reconquista,[REF] a continuous phenomenon by which the Christian Iberian kingdoms opposed and conquered the Muslim kingdoms, understood as a common enemy who had militarily seized Christian territory [REF].
Nevertheless, the difference between Christian and Muslim kingdoms in early medieval Spain was not seen at the time as anything like the clear-cut opposition that later emerged.
The Crusades, which started late in the 11th century, bred the religious ideology of a Christian reconquest, confronted at that time with a similarly staunch Muslim Jihad ideology in Al-Andalus by the Almoravids, and to an even greater degree by the Almohads.
The modern concept of Reconquista is inextricably linked to the foundational myths of Spanish nationalism in the 19th century, and consolidated by the mid-20th century during Franco's National-Catholic dictatorship, based on a strong underlying Castilian ideological element [REF].
Many recent historians dispute the whole concept of Reconquista as a concept created a posteriori in the service of later political goals.
During the 9th century the Berbers returned to Africa in the aftermath of revolts.
After regaining control over the dissident governors, Abd-ar-Rahman III tried to conquer the remaining Christian kingdoms of the Iberian peninsula, attacking them several times and forcing them back beyond the Cantabrian mountains.
Between Almanzor's death and 1031, Al-Andalus suffered many civil wars, which ended in the division into the Taifa kingdoms.
The split into the taifa states weakened the Islamic presence, and the Christian kingdoms further advanced as Alfonso VI conquered Toledo in 1085.
The Almoravids were a Muslim militia primarily composed of Berber and African Moors, and unlike previous Muslim rulers, they were not so tolerant towards Christians and Jews.
Meanwhile, Navarre lost all importance under King Sancho IV, for he lost Rioja to Sancho II of Castile, and nearly became the vassal of Aragon.
Catalonia came under intense pressure from the taifas of Zaragoza and Lérida, as well as from internal disputes, as Barcelona suffered a dynastic crisis that led to open war among the smaller counties.
After a brief period of disintegration (the second Taifa period), the Almohads, the rising power in North Africa, took over most of Al-Andalus.
Ferdinand and Isabella completed the Reconquista with a war against the Emirate of Granada that started in 1482 and ended with Granada's surrender on January 2, 1492.
During the Islamic administration, Christians and Jews were allowed to retain their religions by paying a tax (jizya).
The new Christian hierarchy demanded heavy taxes from non-Christians and gave them rights, such as in the Treaty of Granada (1491) only for Moors in recently Islamic Granada.
Most of the descendants of those Muslims who submitted to conversion to Christianity rather than exile during the early periods of the Spanish and Portuguese Inquisition, the Moriscos, were later expelled from Spain after serious social upheaval, when the Inquisition was at its height.
Making things more complex were the many former Muslims and Jews known as Moriscos, Marranos Conversos who shared ancestors in common with many Christians, especially among the aristocracy, causing much concern over loyalty and attempts by the aristocracy to hide their non-Christian ancestry.
In 711, Muslim Moors, mainly North African Berber soldiers with some Arabs, crossed the Strait of Gibraltar and began their conquest of the Visigothic Kingdom of Hispania.
At no point did the invading Islamic armies exceed 60,000 men [REF].
After the establishment of a local Emirate, Caliph Al-Walid I, ruler of the Umayyad caliphate, removed many of the successful Muslim commanders.
The conquering generals were necessarily acting very independently, due to the methods of communication available.
A serious weakness amongst the Muslim conquerors was the ethnic tension between Berbers and Arabs [REF].
After the Islamic Moorish conquest of nearly all of the Iberian Peninsula in 711-718 and the establishment of the emirate of Al-Andalus, an Umayyad expedition suffered a major defeat at the Battle of Toulouse and was halted for a while on its way north.
A desperate Odo turned to his archrival Charles Martel for help, who led the Frankish and leftover Aquitanian armies against the Umayyad armies and defeated them at the Battle of Tours in 732, killing Abdul Rahman Al Ghafiqi.
The first victory in resistance to Muslim rule occurred in Asturias in 722.
No Muslim source mentions the battle at Covadonga, in contrast with the Battle of Toulouse in 721, with a death toll of perhaps tens of thousands, which was mourned for centuries as a large scale tragedy by the Iberian Muslims.
During the first decades, Asturian control over part of the kingdom was weak, and for this reason it had to be continually strengthened through matrimonial alliances with other powerful families from the north of the Iberian Peninsula.
Pelayo's dynasty in Asturias survived and gradually expanded the kingdom's boundaries until all of northwest Iberia was included by roughly 775.
The kingdom became firmly established with the recognition of Alfonso II as king of Asturias by Charlemagne and the Pope.
Two northern realms, Basque Navarre[REF] and Asturias, despite their small size, demonstrated an ability to maintain their independence.
After the Umayyad conquest of the Iberian heartland of the Visigothic kingdom, the Muslims crossed the Pyrenees and gradually took control of Septimania, starting in 719 with the conquest of Narbonne through 725 when Carcassone and Nîmes were secured.
Ten years after halting their advance north, Odo of Aquitaine married his daughter to Uthman ibn Naissa, a rebel Berber and lord of Cerdanya (perhaps of all of current Catalonia as well), in an attempt to secure his southern borders to fend off Charles Martel's attacks on the north.
The Umayyad governor mustered an expedition north across the western Pyrenees, which made its way to Bordeaux and defeated Odo in the Battle of the River Garonne in 732.
In 737 Charles Martel led an expedition south down the Rhone Valley to assert his authority up to the lands held by the Al-Andalus Umayyads.
After expelling the Muslims from Narbonne in 759 and driving their forces back over the Pyrenees, the Carolingian king Pepin the Short conquered Aquitaine in a ruthless eight-year war.
Charlemagne decided to organize a regional subkingdom in order to keep the Aquitanians in check and to secure the southern border of the Carolingian Empire against Muslim incursions.
Meanwhile, the takeover of the southern fringes of Al-Andalus by Abd ar-Rahman I in 756 was opposed by Yusuf ibn Abd al-Rahman, autonomous governor (wāli) or king (malik) of al-Andalus.
In 778, Abd al-Rahman closed in on the Ebro valley.
Charlemagne, seeing an opportunity, agreed upon an expedition and crossed the Pyrenees in 778.
Around 788 Abd ar-Rahman I died and was succeeded by Hisham I.
Barcelona, a major city, became a potential target for the Franks in 797, as its governor Zeid rebelled against the Umayyad emir of Córdoba.
The main passes in the Pyrenees were Roncesvalles, Somport and La Jonquera.
In the late 9th century under Count Wilfred, Barcelona became the de facto capital of the region.
These states were small and, with the exception of Navarre, did not have the capacity for attacking the Muslims in the way that Asturias did, but their mountainous geography rendered them relatively safe from being conquered, and their borders remained stable for two centuries.
The northern principalities and kingdoms survived in their mountainous strongholds (see above).
The Kingdom of Asturias was located in the Cantabrian Mountains, a wet and mountainous region in the north of the Iberian Peninsula.
Pelagius' kingdom initially was little more than a gathering point for the existing guerrilla forces.
Alfonso's military strategy was typical of Iberian warfare at the time.
During the reign of King Alfonso II (791-842), the kingdom was firmly established, and a series of Muslim raids caused the transfer of the Asturian capital to Oviedo.
The bones of St. James the Great were proclaimed to have been found in Iria Flavia (present day Padrón) in 813 or probably two or three decades later.
Despite numerous battles, neither the Umayyads nor the Asturians had sufficient forces to secure control over these northern territories.
Alfonso III of Asturias repopulated the strategically important city León and established it as his capital.
The Caliphate of Córdoba was gaining power, and began to attack León.
The only point during this period when the situation became hopeful for León was the reign of Ramiro II.
The conquest of León did not consume Galicia, as the Leonese king retreated and was left to temporary independence.
Ferdinand I of León was the leading king of the mid-11th century.
Alfonso VI the Brave gave more power to the fueros and repopulated Segovia, Ávila and Salamanca.
Alfonso VI was first and foremost a tactful monarch who chose to understand the kings of taifa and employed unprecedented diplomatic measures to attain political feats before considering the use of force.
The Kingdom of Pamplona primarily extended along either side of the Pyrenees on the Atlantic Ocean.
Although relatively weak until the early 11th century, Pamplona took a more active role after the accession of Sancho the Great (1004-1035).
In the 12th century, however, the kingdom contracted to its core, and in 1162 King Sancho VI declared himself king of Navarre.
The Kingdom of Aragon was an offshoot of the Kingdom of Navarre.
The Kingdom of Aragon collected a number of territories in the Mediterranean, known as the Crown of Aragon.
Early in his reign, James attempted to reunite the Aragonese and Navarrese crowns through a treaty with the childless Sancho VII of Navarre.
In 1139, after an overwhelming victory in the Battle of Ourique against the Almoravids, Afonso Henriques was proclaimed the first King of Portugal by his troops.
In 1147, Portugal captured Santarém, and seven months later the city of Lisbon was also brought under Portuguese control after the Siege of Lisbon.
With Portugal finally recognized as an independent kingdom by its neighbours, Afonso Henriques and his successors, aided by Crusaders and the military monastic orders the Knights Templar, the Order of Aviz or the Order of Saint James, pushed the Moors to the Algarve on the southern coast of Portugal.
After the completion of the Reconquista, the Portuguese territory was a Roman Catholic realm.
During the suppression of the Knights Templar all over Europe, under the influence of Philip IV of France and Pope Clement V requesting its annihilation by 1312, King Denis reinstituted the Templars of Tomar as the Order of Christ in 1319.
Clashes and raids on bordering Andalusian lands did not keep the Christian kingdoms from battling among themselves or allying with Muslim kings.
Following the disastrous defeat of Alfonso VIII, King of Castile, at Alarcos, Kings Alfonso IX of León and Sancho VII of Navarre entered an alliance with the Almohads and invaded Castile in 1196.
In the late years of Al-Andalus, Castile had the might to conquer the remains of the kingdom of Granada, but the kings preferred to claim the tribute of the Muslim parias.
Since year 2009, the fair has been held in its new location at "Milan Mela" near Science City on E.M. Bypass.
The fair used to be held on the Maidan, Kolkata's large urban park.
During the 1980s and early 1990s, Kolkata played host to two annual book fairs, one by the Kolkata Publishers' and Booksellers' Guild, and one by the Government of West Bengal − the Grontho Mela ('Grontho' is archaic Bengali word for book).
Conservation problems for the Victoria Memorial include high dust pollution, which is often accentuated by public fairs on the Maidan.
A demand for a permanent round-the-year indoor space for the fair, comprising only some of the stalls, had been given by the fair authorities to the Government of West Bengal.
However, many Kolkatans feel that the fair will lose its ambience if it is held indoors or away from the Maidan, which is a vast stretch of green in the heart of the city.
However, organisers of Asia's biggest book fair remained apprehensive, keeping in mind the disgrace in January 2007 when the Kolkata High Court did not allow them to host the fair at the Maidan on environmental grounds.
The 36th International Kolkata Book Fair 2012 flagged off on 25 January 2012 and was operational till 5 February 2013.
On Monday, 30 January 2012, in a bizarre move, the Kolkata Book Fair authorities switched off power during an interaction of Pakistan cricketer and politician Imran Khan with the media, claiming that a press meet scheduled to last for five minutes had stretched to nearly 45 minutes.
36th Kolkata Book Fair 2012 was opened by the famous Italian writer Beppe Severgnini.
Kolkata Book Fair, the world's largest non-trade book fair, had also earned the distinction of being the largest book fair in Asia.
The 36th Kolkata Book Fair has a number of "firsts" in her bag.
Kolkata Book Fair 2012 was also opened by the Chief Minister on 24 January 2012.
Another novelty was the musical performance at the opening ceremony, while signing the song performed by Kaushiki Desikan and Monali Thakur, Shantanu Moitra in presence of enthusiastic audience.
Almost 1.7 million book lovers visited in 12 days in the 35th International Kolkata Book Fair.
Noted Pulitzer Award-winning writer Richard Ford of USA inaugurated the fair.
This was the first time that the Little Magazine Publishers in Little Magazine enclave had been given space at a prime position in the fairground free of cost.
The five halls in the fairground had been named after Acharya Prafulla Chandra, Debabrata Biswas, Shantideb Ghosh, Mother Teresa and Suchitra Mitra.
Talk shows centered around Rabindranath-AAMAR RABINDRANATH (Tagore in my life) were a major crowd puller.
Other attractions included the Montemarte (art village) open air auditorium, the Children's Pavilion 'CHELEBELA', and the Tagore Pavilion.
Starting from the 1990s, the book fair has been themed annually, typically on a country - on the lines of the Guest of Honour at the Frankfurt Book Fair.
Starting from 2005, one of the newest participating international pavilions is named the 'guest of honour', and is a kind of secondary theme of the fair.
Italy' was declared the theme for Kolkata Book Fair 2012, by Publishers and Booksellers Guild, Kolkata.
Most bookstalls in the book fair keep English and Bengali books.
Virtually all major European scientific publishers or corresponding franchisees set up shop, including Oxford University Press, Cambridge University Press, Kluwer and Springer Verlag.
The fair's diplomatic mission stalls display and sell books from their countries.
Most major news media in Calcutta have stalls, including The Statesman and The Telegraph.
Calcutta institutions, which have their own press or publishing house typically host stalls - including the Indian Museum, Asiatic Society, survey institutes like Zoological Survey of India, Botanical Survey of India, Geological Survey of India, and universities like University of Calcutta, Jadavpur University and Rabindra Bharati University.
The initial rule that only publishers, and not institutions which just sold or distributed books but did not publish any books, can participate in the fair has been waved in the 2000s.
In 2014, Wikipedia made its first appearance at the Kolkata Book fair, launching its campaign to enthuse people to become regular contributors to its site [REF].
The 30th Kolkata Book Fair got underway in the City of Joy on the Republic Day at the city's Maidan from 25 January to 6 February 2005 [REF].
For the first time in the fair's history, three big players of the publishing industry -- Ananda Publishers, Mitra & Ghosh and Dey's Publishing- set-up their stalls adjacent to each other.
France was the theme of 2005's fair.
An eminent environmentalist moved the Calcutta High Court claiming that preparation for the Kolkata Book Fair was leading to pollution of the Brigade Parade Ground area, considered to be the lung of the metropolis.
Kolkata Book Fair 2005, held at Milan Mela Prangan, highlighted the IT and ITES aspects of the state along with the changing face of West Bengal's infrastructure and talent pool.
The 2005 Kolkata Book Fair was held over an area of 800,000 sq.ft.
The United States was elected as the focal theme country for the 2008 Book Fair and was given a pavilion to showcase its books and publishers.
Pulitzer Prize-winning poet Yusef Komunyakaa led the delegation to the 2008 Kolkata Book Fair.
Less than 24 hours before its inauguration, the Kolkata High Court banned the 33rd Kolkata Book Fair from being held on the Park Circus Maidan on environmental grounds.
The 2007 fair attracted a lot of controversy over the Kolkata High Court decision banning fairs on the Maidan.
In 2007 Romania participated for the first time.
The rescheduled Book Fair was held in Salt Lake City, a place located at the outskirts of Kolkata from 9 February up to 25 February.
With lesser space and lesser footfall, the 2007 fair was a moderate success at best.
The 2009 book fair at Milan Mela Maidan was a gala success, according to the figures published by the organizing committee.
The biggest problem the book fair faces are the huge crowds which visit the fair - crowd and litter control are a major issue at the fair.
An associated problem is dust pollution, and resulting dust allergy and depreciation of exhibited books due to shopsoiling.
Traffic and parking problems during fair days usually make the visit steeped in logistics.
A large fire in 1997 destroyed over one third of the fair, burnt over 100,000 books and caused the death of a visitor (Jiten Seal), who suffered a heart attack brought on by the ensuing stampede.
Another problem due to the huge crowds is shoplifting.
All first editions of books which are released in the fair are housed in a special release gallery.
The Book Fair has been the annual show for Bengali little magazines since the inception of the fair.
From the 1990s, the Kolkata Book Fair also has a special section for budding artists, authors, poets and painters.
The fair also has a special children's section starting from the 2000s.
Following the devastating fire of 1997, the food stalls have also shared a common enclave.
Includes the administration of Lyman Hall (1896-1905) In 1888, Captain Lyman Hall was appointed Georgia Tech's first mathematics professor, a position he held until his appointment as the school's second president in 1896.
Hall's other goals included enlarging Tech and attracting more students, so he expanded the school's offerings beyond mechanical engineering; new degrees introduced during Hall's administration included electrical engineering and civil engineering in December 1896, textile engineering in February 1899, and engineering chemistry in January 1901 [REF].
Hall died on August 16, 1905 during a vacation at a New York health resort.
On October 20, 1905, U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt visited the Georgia Tech campus.
Includes the administrations of Paul Weber (interim, February 1956-August 1957) and Edwin D. Harrison (1957-1969) .
Around 1960, state law mandated "an immediate cut-off of state funds to any white institution that admitted a black student" [REF].
There was little reaction to this by Tech students who, like the city of Atlanta described by former mayor William Hartsfield, were "too busy to hate" [REF].
The Ramblin' Wreck, the iconic 1930 Ford Model A Sport coupe that serves as the official mascot of the student body, was acquired in this era.
James E. Boyd, Assistant Director of Research at the Engineering Experiment Station since 1954, was appointed Director of the station from July 1, 1957, a post in which he served until 1961 [REF].
Harrison's administration also addressed the disparity between salaries at Georgia Tech and competing institutions [REF].
Students across the nation protested the Vietnam War, including at similar institutions such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where students picketed and blocked access to the Draper Laboratory that was producing guidance systems for the Poseidon missile [REF].
There was similar nationwide concern over the United States' involvement in the Cambodian Civil War, resulting in the Kent State shootings, which in turn caused about 450 colleges to suspend classes [REF].
A 1965 plan signaled the beginning of Tech's expansion to include what is now West Campus.
Includes the administrations of G. Wayne Clough (1994-2008), Gary Schuster (interim, 2008-2009), and George P. "Bud" Peterson (2009-present) In 1994, G. Wayne Clough became the first Tech alumnus to serve as the President of the Institute.
Clough's tenure especially focused on a dramatic expansion and modernization of the institute.
In 1999, Georgia Tech began offering local degree programs to engineering students in Southeast Georgia.
The master plan for the school's physical growth and development-created in 1912[REF] and significantly revised in 1952, 1965, and 1991-saw two further revisions under Clough's guidance in 1997 and 2002 [REF].
The school has also taken care to maintain its Historic District, with several projects dedicated to the preservation or improvement of Tech Tower, the school's first and oldest building and its primary administrative center.
On March 15, 2008, Clough was appointed to lead the Smithsonian Institution, effective July 1, 2008 [REF].
In 2011, Georgia Tech opened the G. Wayne Clough Undergraduate Learning Commons building named in honor of his commitment to undergraduate students; it was dedicated on his birthday, September 24, 2011 [REF].
Includes the administration of Kenneth G. Matheson (1906-1922) Upon his hiring in 1904, John Heisman (for whom the Heisman Trophy is named) insisted that the school acquire its own football field.
Attempts at forming an alumni association had been made since 1896; a charter was applied for by J. B. McCrary and William H. Glenn on June 28, 1906 and was approved by Fulton County on June 20, 1908 [REF].
Georgia Tech's Evening School of Commerce began holding classes in 1912 [REF].
World War I caused several changes at the school.
The bitter rivalry between Georgia Tech and the University of Georgia flared up in 1919, when UGA mocked Tech's continuation of football during the United States' involvement in World War I.
When UGA renewed its program in 1919, their student body staged a parade which mocked Tech's continuation of football during times of war.
In 1916 Georgia Tech's football team, still coached by John Heisman, defeated Cumberland 222-0, the largest margin of victory in college football history [REF].
In its first decades, Georgia Tech slowly grew from a trade school into a university.
The latter years of Matheson's presidency were troubled by a chronic shortage of funds.
As Matheson was leaving for the presidency of Drexel Institute in late 1921, he wrote in The Atlanta Constitution that while Georgia Tech was "my first love" he found it a "humiliating burden" to get enough money from the state legislature to run and enlarge the school [REF].
In October 1990, Tech opened its first overseas campus, Georgia Tech Lorraine (GTL) [REF].
Crecine was instrumental in securing the 1996 Summer Olympics for Atlanta.
After Atlanta won the Olympics bid, a dramatic amount of construction occurred, creating most of what is now considered "West Campus" in order for Tech to serve as the Olympic Village [REF].
Includes the administration of Blake R. Van Leer (1944-1956) Founded as the "Georgia School of Technology," the school assumed its present name on July 1, 1948 to reflect a growing focus on advanced technological and scientific research [REF].
The Southern Technical Institute (STI) was established in 1948 in barracks on the campus of Naval Air Station Atlanta (now DeKalb Peachtree Airport) in Chamblee, northeast of Atlanta [REF].
The only women that had attended Georgia Tech did so through the School of Commerce.
This period also saw a significant expansion in Georgia Tech's postgraduate education programs, driven largely by the Cold War and the launch of Sputnik; this effort received substantial support from the EES [REF].
After a successful (8-1-1) football season in 1955, Tech was invited to play in the 1956 Sugar Bowl in New Orleans against the University of Pittsburgh.
Includes the administrations of Joseph M. Pettit (1972-1986) and Henry C. Bourne, Jr. (interim, 1986-1987) Joseph M. Pettit became president of the Georgia Institute of Technology in 1972 [REF].
During Pettit's tenure, the Institute progressed into the top tier of technological education institutions.
In the aftermath of the launch of Scientific Atlanta and the subsequent disputes, Georgia Tech's culture encouraged hard work, but did not encourage start-ups [REF].
Pettit also oversaw Georgia Tech's application and admittance into the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC), an athletic league founded in 1953 which included seven charter members.
The Institute celebrated its centennial in 1985.
Includes the administration of Marion L. Brittain (1922-1944) On August 1, 1922, Marion L. Brittain was elected as the school's president.
In 1929, some Georgia Tech faculty members belonging to Sigma Xi started a research club that met once a month at Tech [REF].
The Great Depression threatened the already tentative nature of Georgia Tech's funding.
As a cost-saving move, effective on July 1, 1934, the Georgia Board of Regents transferred control of the relatively large Evening School of Commerce to the University of Georgia and moved the small civil engineering program at UGA to Tech [REF].
In 1933, S. V. Sanford, president of the University of Georgia, proposed that a "technical research activity" be established at Tech.
The EES's early work was conducted in the basement of the Shop Building, and Vaughan's office was in the Aeronautical Engineering Building [REF].
In 1939, EES director Vaughan became the director of the School of Ceramic Engineering.
The Cocking affair occurred in 1941 and 1942 when Georgia governor Eugene Talmadge exerted direct control over the state's educational system, particularly through the firing of University of Georgia professor Walter Cocking, who had been hired to raise the relatively low academic standards at UGA's College of Education [REF].
World War II resulted in a dramatic increase of sponsored research, with the 1943-1944 budget being the first in which industry and government contracts exceeded the EES's other income (most notably, its state appropriation) [REF].
Until the mid-1940s, the school required students to be able to create a simple electric motor regardless of their major [REF].
Includes the administrations of Vernon D. Crawford (interim, March 1969-August 1969), Arthur G. Hansen (1969-1971), and James E. Boyd (interim, 1971-1972) On July 1, 1968, Vernon D. Crawford became dean of the institute's General College [REF].
James E. Boyd, who had assumed the vice chancellorship of the University System of Georgia the previous month, was appointed Acting President of Georgia Tech by Chancellor George L. Simpson in May 1971 [REF].
The EES had sizable and growing support from the state of Georgia and its Industrial Development Council, which developed products and methods and provided technical assistance for Georgia industry [REF].
Boyd's predecessor Arthur G. Hansen's "bold and controversial" solution to both entities' problems was to completely integrate the station into Georgia Tech's academic units [REF].
This was the climate into which Boyd entered as interim institute president after Hansen had announced, on April 27, 1971, that he would be departing Georgia Tech to become president of Purdue University on July 1 of that year [REF].
Boyd had to deal with intense public pressure to fire Yellow Jackets football coach Bud Carson.
Traditional sources of Athletic Association income, primarily ticket sales, had declined as a result of both the Yellow Jackets' poor record and the relatively recent establishment of professional football in Atlanta, namely the Atlanta Falcons.
Georgia Tech's mascot Buzz got his start in the 1970s.
As noted by a historical marker on the large hill in Central Campus, the site occupied by the school's first buildings once held fortifications built to protect Atlanta during the Atlanta Campaign of the American Civil War.
The establishment of a school of technology was proposed in 1882 during the Reconstruction period.
With authorization from the Georgia General Assembly, Harris and a committee of prominent Georgians visited renowned technology schools in the Northeast in 1883; these included the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Stevens Institute of Technology, and Cooper Union.
When the committee returned, they submitted their findings to the Georgia General Assembly as House Bill 732 on July 24, 1883.
Governor McDaniel appointed a commission in January 1886 to organize and run the school.
The committee members voted exclusively for their respective home cities until the 21st ballot when Porter switched to Atlanta; on the 24th ballot, Atlanta finally emerged victorious [REF].
The school's new location was bounded on the south by North Avenue, and on the west by Cherry Street [REF].
The first class of students at the Georgia School of Technology was small and homogeneous, and educational options were limited.
John Saylor Coon was appointed the first Mechanical Engineering and Drawing Professor at the Georgia School of Technology in 1889 [REF].
Tech began its football program with several students forming a loose-knit troop of footballers called the Blacksmiths.
The words to Georgia Tech's famous fight song, "Ramblin' Wreck from Georgia Tech", are said to have come from an early baseball game against rival Georgia [REF].
Tech's first student publication was the Technologian, which ran for a short time in 1891 [REF].
All nodes on the CAN network must operate at the same nominal bit rate, but noise, phase shifts, oscillator tolerance and oscillator drift mean that the actual bit rate may not be the same as the nominal bit rate [REF].
Synchronization starts with a hard synchronization on the first recessive to dominant transition after a period of bus idle (the start bit).
A transition that occurs before or after it is expected causes the controller to calculate the time difference and lengthen phase segment 1 or shorten phase segment 2 by this time.
When developing and/or troubleshooting the CAN bus, examination of hardware signals can be very important.
A is an analysis tool, often a combination of hardware and software, used during development of hardware making use of the CAN bus.
Typically the CAN bus monitor will listen to the traffic on the CAN bus in order to display it in a user interface.
The modern automobile may have as many as 70 electronic control units (ECU) for various subsystems [REF].
In recent years, the LIN bus standard has been introduced to complement CAN for non-critical subsystems such as air-conditioning and infotainment, where data transmission speed and reliability are less critical.
The CAN bus protocol has been used on the Shimano DI2 electronic gear shift system for road bicycles since 2009, and is also used by the Ansmann and BionX systems in their direct drive motor.
The CAN bus is also used as a fieldbus in general automation environments, primarily due to the low cost of some CAN controllers and processors.
Manufacturers including NISMO aim to use CAN bus to recreate real-life racing laps in the videogame Gran Turismo 6 using the game's GPS Data Logger function, which would then allow players to race against real laps [REF].
Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory's Modular Prosthetic Limb (MPL) uses a local CAN bus to facilitate communication between servos and microcontrollers in the prosthetic arm.
Development of the CAN bus started in 1983 at Robert Bosch GmbH [REF].
Bosch published several versions of the CAN specification and the latest is CAN 2.0 published in 1991.
In 1993 the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) released the CAN standard ISO 11898 which was later restructured into two parts; ISO 11898-1 which covers the data link layer, and ISO 11898-2 which covers the CAN physical layer for high-speed CAN.
Bosch is still active in extending the CAN standards.
CAN bus is one of five protocols used in the on-board diagnostics (OBD)-II vehicle diagnostics standard.
CAN is a multi-master serial bus standard for connecting Electronic Control Units [ECUs] also known as nodes.
All nodes are connected to each other through a two wire bus.
ISO 11898-2, also called high speed CAN, uses a linear bus terminated at each end with 120 &Omega; resistors.
ISO 11898-3, also called low speed or fault tolerant CAN, uses a linear bus, star bus or multiple star buses connected by a linear bus and is terminated at each node by a fraction of the overall termination resistance.
With both high speed and low speed CAN, the speed of the transition is faster when a recessive to dominant transition occurs since the CAN wires are being actively driven.
High speed CAN is usually used in automotive and industrial applications where the bus runs from one end of the environment to the other.
The ISO specifications require the bus be kept within a minimum and maximum common mode bus voltage, but do not define how to keep the bus within this range.
The CAN bus must be terminated.
High speed CAN uses a 120 &Omega
A provides power and ground in addition to the CAN signaling on a four-wire cable.
Sensors, actuators and control devices can be connected to the host processor.
Each node is able to send and receive messages, but not simultaneously.
The devices that are connected by a CAN network are typically sensors, actuators, and other control devices.
The data frame is the only frame for actual data transmission.
The CAN standard requires the implementation must accept the base frame format and may accept the extended frame format, but must tolerate the extended frame format.
The two identifier fields (A & B) combine to form a 29-bit identifier.
Generally data transmission is performed on an autonomous basis with the data source node (e.g., a sensor) sending out a Data Frame.
There are two differences between a Data Frame and a Remote Frame.
In the event of a Data Frame and a Remote Frame with the same identifier being transmitted at the same time, the Data Frame wins arbitration due to the dominant RTR bit following the identifier.
The following second field is the ERROR DELIMITER (8 recessive bits).
The overload frame contains the two bit fields Overload Flag and Overload Delimiter.
Detection of a dominant bit during intermission.
The start of an overload frame due to case 1 is only allowed to be started at the first bit time of an expected intermission, whereas overload frames due to case 2 start one bit after detecting the dominant bit.
To ensure enough transitions to maintain synchronization, a bit of opposite polarity is inserted after five consecutive bits of the same polarity.
All fields in the frame are stuffed with the exception of the CRC delimiter, ACK field and end of frame which are a fixed size and are not stuffed.
Bit stuffing means that data frames may be larger than one would expect by simply enumerating the bits shown in the tables above.
CAN data transmission uses a lossless bitwise arbitration method of contention resolution.
The CAN specifications use the terms "dominant" bits and "recessive" bits where dominant is a logical 0 (actively driven to a voltage by the transmitter) and recessive is a logical 1 (passively returned to a voltage by a resistor).
The exact voltages for a logical 0 or 1 depend on the physical layer used, but the basic principle of CAN requires that each node listens to the data on the CAN network including the transmitting node(s) itself (themselves).
For example, consider an 11-bit ID CAN network, with two nodes with IDs of 15 (binary representation, 00000001111) and 16 (binary representation, 00000010000).
When the 8th bit is transmitted, the node with the ID of 16 transmits a 1 (recessive) for its ID, and the node with the ID of 15 transmits a 0 (dominant) for its ID.
Bit rates up to 1 Mbit/s are possible at network lengths below 40 m.
This de facto mechanical standard for CAN could be implemented with the node having both male and female 9-pin D-sub connectors electrically wired to each other in parallel within the node.
The absence of a complete physical layer specification (mechanical in addition to electrical) freed the CAN bus specification from the constraints and complexity of physical implementation.
ISO 11898-2 provides some immunity to common mode voltage between transmitter and receiver by having a 0 V rail running along the bus to maintain a high degree of voltage association between the nodes.
ISO 11898-2 describes the electrical implementation formed from a multi-dropped single-ended balanced line configuration with resistor termination at each end of the bus.
During a recessive state the signal lines and resistor(s) remain in a high impedances state with respect to both rails.
During a dominant state the signal lines and resistor(s) move to a low impedance state with respect to the rails so that current flows through the resistor.
In 1982, Riverside Shakespeare Company began a series of expanded tours of Free Summer Shakespeare made possible through sponsorship by Joseph Papp and the New York Shakespeare Festival.
The first of these was a tour - to twelve different parks in four boroughs - of Shakespeare's raucous A Comedy of Errors directed by Gloria Skurski, with costumes by Barbara Weiss, on a touring set designed by Dorian Vernacchio.
The following summer the company mounted a music-filled production of The Merry Wives of Windsor set in old, post-Civil War New Orleans and directed by Timothy Oman, with Maureen Clarke as Assistant Director, featuring ragtime music by Deena Kaye.
In the hands of composer and keyboard player Deena Kaye, the Riverside production of The Merry Wives of Windsor verged on becoming a full-fledged musical, with numerous tunes played by the ragtime band.
For this production, the company secured $15,000 from New York Telephone to overhaul the mobile stage that been used by the New York Shakespeare Festival for parks tours before the NYSF stopped touring four years before [REF].
The production opened at the Bandshell in New York's Central Park to an audience estimated at over a thousand (according to Newsday) [REF].
The old mobile unit could not withstand the rigors of a month-long, outdoor tour of transporting "fair Verona" to the five boroughs of New York City.
On March 24, 2008, the first annual reunion of former Riverside Shakespeare Company actors, directors, composers, and designers was held at the Marriott Marquis, in New York City.
Present at the reunion were company members Kevin Lee Allen, Kieron Murphy, Scott Parson, Jim Maxson, Gloria Skurski, Margo Gruber, W. Stuart McDowell, Michael Canick, Andrew Achsen, Herman Petras, Robert Mooney, Eric Hoffmann, and Dan Southern (aka Dan Smith).
Also present were Lisa Graham Parson, Pedro Ruiz, Cindy Ratzlaff, Charles Borkas, and photographer Claire McDowell.
This was followed by a Commedia dell'arte production of Two Gentlemen of Verona directed by Dan Southern produced Off Broadway in the American Theatre for Actors, with music by Bob Rosen, with Ronald Lew Harris, Jim Maxson, Joe Meek, Amy Aquino, Allison Edwards, Dennis Pfister, and J. C. Hoit [REF].
The production of The Three Cuckolds was performed in a broad farcical style with numerous contemporary references, and extensive use of acrobatics, such as a backflip performed by Jim Brewster on his entrance as the young lover.
The New York premiere of Edward II was grounded on interviews McDowell had made in Germany with cast members - Erwin Faber and Hans Schweikart - of the original Munich production of 1924, which had been Brecht's debut as stage director.
The Riverside Shakespeare production featured an original score composed by Michael Canick for percussion and played by percussionist Noel Council above and to the side of the audience in the side tower that had been erected within the theatre of The Shakespeare Center of the newly renovated theatre.
Opening night, a special panel of scholars on German theatre and the drama of the Weimar Republic in particular was presented in the theatre before the play, including a display of photos from the original Munich production.
The production of Much Ado About Nothing was staged as the first part of a double bill, followed by a glass of wine and then, on the same stage with a quick change of scenery, by Niccolo Machiavelli's The Mandrake [REF].
The company then mounted its first History Play by Shakespeare.
The popularity of Henry IV, Part IV at Columbia University enabled the company to extend the run by remounting the entire production Off Broadway indoors at the American Theatre for Actors in midtown Manhattan in the fall of 1979.
W. Stuart McDowell[REF] left Riverside in 1986 to found McDowell/Scripps Productions with arts benefactor, Samuel H. Scripps, and is now Chair of the Department of Theatre Dance and Motion Pictures at Wright State University in Dayton, Ohio.
Beginning in 1986, the Riverside Shakespeare Company was led by Robert Small, followed by Timothy W. Oman, who moved the company to permanent Off Broadway status at Playhouse 91, located on East 91st Street on the upper Eastside of Manhattan, where it was subsequently led by Gus Kaikkonen.
During its fifteenth year, the theatre company was praised in the weekly publication The Nation for producing "the most dependably accomplished performances of Shakespeare's plays regularly available in New York City."[REF] .
In its twenty years of work as a theatre and educational training center, the Riverside Shakespeare Company presented over one hundred Equity productions, benefits and radio broadcasts of works by Shakespeare, Marlowe, Brecht, Machiavelli, and Shaw, as well as premieres of plays and Commedia dell'arte scenari.
Founded with a core of graduates from the University of California at Berkeley,[REF] the Riverside Shakespeare Company of New York City opened its first production, Romeo and Juliet, in August 1977 in Riverside Park.
The inaugural production of Romeo and Juliet was a two-hour version, trimmed to incorporate extensive swordplay, an extended ballroom dance scene, and pantomime, such as the appearance to Juliet of Tybalt's ghost.
The following autumn, the company began a series of readings of the works of Shakespeare, reading through the entire canon the first year.
During its inaugural 1977-1978 season, after its parks tour of Romeo & Juliet, the Riverside Shakespeare Company presented a free 'Equity library tour' of Twelfth Night, directed by Gloria Skurski,[REF] which then had an extended run Off Broadway at the Manhattan Theatre Club Stage 73.
In the spring of 1978, the company mounted the complete Hamlet on the courtyard roof of Riverside Church in Manhattan in late afternoon.
Riverside's Hamlet marked its first First Folio Production, in which the entire text of Shakespeare's play was presented in a lively, action-filled production, enabling the company to mount the complete Hamlet in under three hours.
In its second summer, 1978, the company presented a popular free tour of A Midsummer Night's Dream, with Eric Hoffmann as Puck, Karen Hurley as Titania, and Eric Conger as Oberon, directed by Gloria Skurski [REF].
The parks tour of A Midsummer Night's Dream was expanded to play locations in three boroughs of New York City, including Wave Hill in the Bronx, which became a favorite annual summer performing site for the company.
In what was becoming a Riverside tradition, each performance was preceded a half hour before curtain by a "Greenshow" of Commedia entertainment, by the cast and musicians on the stage and throughout the audience [REF].
Hoffmann set Shakespeare's most pastoral play with an autumnal setting in Colonial American, using leaves gathered from Central Park, which gradually filled the stage with knee-deep piles of leaves, and underscored with original guitar music played by Robert Mamary and Joseph Poshek.
The production was attended by Mildred Natwick, who became the company's first member of its Board of Advisors, soon to be followed by Helen Hayes.
In 1979 the Riverside Shakespeare Company mounted Niccolo Machiavelli's Renaissance farce, The Mandrake, in the large second floor auditorium of the Casa Italiana of Columbia University located at West 117th and Amsterdam Avenue.
Performing in the style of Commedia dell'arte, with masks and fanciful commedia costumes, the cast included Arland Russell, Mark Cavalieri, Jeff Cameron, Tom Hanks, Susan Kay Logan, Perla Armanasco and Michael Goldner.
The leather masks designed by Stein were often used inventively to comic effect, with actors sometimes removing them for an inner monologue, as in Hanks' portrayal of Callimaco, in which he conversed to himself while holding his quarter mask to one side.
The Mandrake was accompanied by an original jazz score played by Steve Elson, Lincoln Goines, Mio Morales, and composed (and with a running improvised narration) by pianist-composer-orchestra leader Michael Wolff.
The production of The Mandrake opened on March 2, 1979 at the Casa Italiana, and was stage managed by Nancy Consentino Minckler and produced by W. Stuart McDowell and Gloria Skurski, in association with Columbia University.
Later that year, the success of Riverside's production of The Mandrake enabled the company to remount the show with the company's new production of Much Ado About Nothing as a late night double bill in repertory at Manhattan Theatre Club's Stage 73.
Subsequent to its two indoor stagings, The Mandrake was revived for several outdoor engagements, performed on a two-wheel cart with simple cloth backdrop, beginning with the dedication of the Shakespeare Garden in the Brooklyn, hosted by Joseph Papp, Estelle Parsons and W. Stuart McDowell.
As in the Riverside tradition of the Greenshow, the production of The Mandrake - whether indoors or outside in a park - relied on broad physicalization, improvisation, and comic lazzi, as well as interacting with the audience in the manner of Commedia dell'arte.
The production combined modern (Grace Kelly's Monaco) and historical (pastoral 18th century England) periods in a concept centered around a magical transformation that takes place when Mamillius begins to recount "the winter's tale" to his mother, Hermione.
According to the Riverside program, McDowell's interpretation posited that these eight words - the entirety of "the winter's tale" - are nothing less than a prophecy concerning Leontes, Mamillius' father, who would some day virtually dwell by a graveyard, mourning the passing of Hermione and Mamillius (Act III, Sc. ii.
During rehearsals for The Winter's Tale the company was virtually stranded in the theatre during the blizzard that hit New York City in mid-February 1983.
After the opening on February 24, Riverside's The Winter's Tale was broadcast on New York's WBAI, before which it was described as, "An exceptional production of one of the Bard's seldom-produced scripts..brilliant."[REF]
Later that year the company mounted Taming of the Shrew in 1983 directed by Robert Mooney with music by Joseph Church and set designs by Kevin Lee Allen, with Diane Ciesla and Dan Southern, and Ronald Lew Harris, Eric Hoffmann, Joe Meek, and Robert Mooney.
In 1984 the company presented a modern dress version of Julius Caesar, entitled CAESAR!
The production featured Obie Award-winner Harold Scott,[REF] and Marya Lowry, with Michael Cook, Andy Achsen, Ronald Lew Harris, Paul Hebron, Sonja Lanzener, Jim Maxson, Joe Meek, Robert Walsh and Herman Petras as Caesar.
The production proved immensely popular with audiences, setting, as it did, Shakespeare's play in contemporary Washington, D.C. in a country on the verge of making its popular leader president for life.
In 1985 the Riverside Shakespeare Company presented the New York premiere of The History of King Lear, adapted with a happy ending by 18th-century English Poet Laureate, Nahum Tate, from William Shakespeare's King Lear.
The production featured a complete, original score for harpsichord and orchestra by John Aschenbrenner, fights choreographed by Richard Raether, lighting by Sam Scripps, and a period wind machine in the wings.
Riverside mounted this historical piece in an 18th-century setting, with authentic period costumes by Ellen Seeling on a set designed by Norbert Kolb.
There are two middle schools for pupils between 9 and 13 years of age, Oakfield Middle School and Selwood Anglican/Methodist Middle School.
In 2012 the first publicly funded Steiner Academy in the UK opened in Frome.
There are no further or higher education establishments in Frome, the closest third-level institution being the University of Bath.
Frome is served by the Bristol to Weymouth railway line which passes the eastern edge of the town.
Frome is also served by a number of bus routes, the busiest being the 267 First West of England service to Bath, followed by the X67 and X34 services run by Faresaver of Chippenham.
The A361 bypasses the town around the southern and eastern edges, while the A362 passes through the centre of the town from north-west to south-east.
There is a public-access car club, operated by the social enterprise Co-wheels [REF].
Frome is the largest town within the Somerset non-metropolitan district of Mendip, although the administrative centre is Shepton Mallet.
The town elects three members to Somerset County Council, each from a separate county division.
Frome also has eleven councillors on Mendip District Council, two from each of the town council wards except for Oakfield, which elects only one.
The civil parish of Frome has adopted the style of a town, and there is a Town Council of 17 members.
There are 6 electoral wards in Frome having the same total population as that quoted above.
The town has a new National Health Service community hospital, operated by Somerset Primary Care Trust, located on the site of the former Showground at Fromefield [REF].
The metal-working and printing industries which replaced wool as Frome's main industry have declined but not left the town.
Almost half of the economically active population of Frome commute to work outside the town (in Bath, Bristol, Warminster, Westbury or further afield).
Frome town centre contains a considerable number of independent shops, and a few chain stores.
A Vision for Frome 2008-2028 has been developed following a consultation with local people in the spring of 2008 which received over 3,000 responses [REF].
There have been a number of significant housing developments within Frome, many on former industrial sites, and these are continuing with plans for the redevelopment of a site at Saxonvale and Garsdale to include several hundred dwellings, shops and a 'cultural quarter' containing workshops for artists [REF].
There is some limited evidence of Roman settlement in the area.
The name Frome comes from the Brythonic word *frāmā (Modern Welsh ffraw)[REF] meaning fair, fine or brisk and describing the flow of the river [REF].
Hales Castle was built, probably in the years immediately after the Norman conquest of England in 1066 [REF].
The manufacture of woollen cloth was established as the town's principal industry in the 15th century,[REF][REF] and Frome remained the only Somerset town in which this staple industry flourished [REF].
On 12 April 1477, Ankarette Twynyho was taken from the manor house that stands, known locally as the Old Nunnery, in Lower Keyford accused by George Plantagenet, 1st Duke of Clarence of the murder of Isabel Neville, Duchess of Clarence.
On 27 June 1685, the forces of the Duke of Monmouth camped in Frome, following their defeat in a skirmish with the King's forces at Norton St Philip.
Poverty, the decline of the wool industry in the mid-18th century, increased industrialisation, and rising food prices led to some unrest amongst the inhabitants of Frome, and there were riots during the century.
Whilst wool remained an important part of the town's economy into the 19th (and even 20th) centuries, other industries were established in the town.
During the 20th century the old wool industry in Frome declined, although the last fabric mill at Wallsbridge did not close until 1965 [REF].
The town rests on Forest Marble which dates back to the Middle Jurassic,[REF] and has been used for local building.
Although the royal forest of Selwood no longer exists, the nearby countryside is still richly wooded, for example on the Longleat, Maiden Bradley and Stourhead estates.
Along with the rest of South West England, Frome has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of England.
Cloud often forms inland, especially near hills, and reduces exposure to sunshine.
Frome has a thriving arts scene [REF].
Frome's only cinema, the Westway, is in Cork Street in the town centre, which closed in March 2016 [REF].
The Frome & District Agricultural Society holds an annual Agricultural & Cheese Show in September [REF].
Frome is served by two newspapers, the Frome & Somerset Standard and the Frome Times.
Frome is also home to the Frome Writers Collective - a not for profit organization.
Frome's Cheap Street is a location in episode six of the first series of BBC TV comedy The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin [REF].
Frome also appears as a location in The Circle of Sappho, the second book in The Regency Detective series of novels, written by David Lassman and Terence James [REF] .
Frome restaurants include the Archangel on King Street, which received a 9/10 rating in The Sunday Telegraph [REF].
Benjamin Baker, builder of the Forth Bridge, was born in Frome in 1840 [REF].
Charles Ball, founder of Ball & Welch department store chain in Australia.
The Formula One racing driver and 2009 world champion Jenson Button was born in Frome in 1980.
The cricketer Colin Dredge was born in Frome in 1954 [REF].
Eadred (or Edred) (923-955), King of England between 944 and 955, died in Frome on 23 November of that year [REF].
Alfred "Pee Wee" Ellis (born 1941 in Bradenton, Florida), saxophonist, composer and arranger, lives locally.
The philosopher Joseph Glanvill was Vicar of Frome from 1662 to 1666 [REF].
Guy Green, film director, screenwriter, and cinematographer, who won an Oscar for Great Expectations in the last category, was born at 4 Portway in Frome in 1913 [REF].
Alice Seeley Harris, pioneering documentary photographer, missionary and human rights activist, born in Frome in 1870.
Charlie Higson of The Fast Show was born in Frome in 1958 [REF].
Actor James Laurenson lives in the town [REF].
Lois Maxwell, who played Miss Moneypenny in the James Bond film series from 1962 to 1985, lived in Frome from 1994 to 2001 [REF].
Sir Charles Oatley, developer of one of the first commercial scanning electron microscopes, was born at 5 Badcox in Frome in 1904 [REF].
Anthony Powell, author, died in Frome in 2000.
William Henry "Billy" Reed, violinist, composer and biographer of Edward Elgar, was born in Christ Church Street in Frome in 1875 [REF].
Kate Rew, author and wild swimmer [REF].
Christina Rossetti (poet, and sister of Dante Gabriel Rossetti), helped her mother run a day school in Frome in 1853/4 [REF].
Elizabeth Singer Rowe (poet and devotional writer, first published by John Dunton).
Henry Thomas Ryall, royal engraver to Queen Victoria, was born in Frome in 1811 [REF].
Richard Vranch of Whose Line Is It Anyway? was born in Frome in 1959 [REF].
Sir Charles Wilkins, the first translator of Bhagavad Gita into English, was born in Frome around 1749 [REF].
Kerry Wilkinson, one of Amazon's top-10 best-selling authors worldwide for 2011,[REF] went to Oakfield Middle School and Frome Community College [REF].
Luke Hood, owner of the music brand UKF Music.
The parish church of St John the Baptist, was built between the late 12th century and early 15th century replacing a 685 AD Saxon building.
In 1853, Irvingite Catholics (Catholic-Apostolic) began worshipping in a building in the West End until the church was closed.
Baptists had been worshipping in the town since 1669, and had two churches.
The older parts of Frome - for example, around Sheppard's Barton and Catherine Hill - are picturesque, containing an outstanding collection of small late-17th- and 18th-century houses [REF].
The town bridge, originally built in the 14th century, was rebuilt in the 17th century and widened in the 19th century,[REF] at which time houses were built on it [REF].
Frome has more than 500 listed buildings, three of which (including the parish church) are grade I listed.
Rook Lane Chapel was a noncomformist chapel built between 1705 and 1707 by James Pope.
Frome is reputed to have one or more systems of tunnels beneath the streets of the older parts of the town.
The Leisure Centre offers a wide range of activities including swimming, indoor bowls, squash and a gym,[REF] originally opened in 1974, and refurbished through October 2015 to May 2016.
Victoria Park offers sports such as Bowls, Tennis, Putting, Skateboard ramps and a Children's' Playground.
Badgers Hill, currently known as the Blindmans Brewery Stadium, is the home of Frome Town F.C., which in 2009 was promoted from the Western Football League into the Southern Football League [REF].
Frome Cricket Club plays cricket at the Agricultural Showgrounds on the Bath side of town.
Formed in 1883, Frome Rugby Club plays at Gypsy Lane [REF].
The Frome Cobble Wobble, is an individually timed bicycle hill climb sprint [REF].
17 June 1935 - Mario Roustan succeeds Marcombes (d. 13 June) as Minister of National Education.
26 March 1943 - Maurice Gabolde succeeds Barthélemy as Minister of Justice.
21 November 1943 - Jean Bichelonne succeeds Lagardelle as Minister of Labour, remaining also Minister of Industrial Production and Communication.
31 December 1943 - Minister of State Lucien Romier resigns from the government.
6 January 1944 - Pierre Cathala succeeds Bonnafous as Minister of Agriculture and Supply, remaining also Minister of Finance and National Economy.
3 March 1944 - The office of Minister of Supply is abolished.
16 March 1944 - Marcel Déat succeeds Bichelonne as Minister of Labour and National Solidarity.
In April 1914, as fear of war swept the nation, the Socialists and Radicals geared up their electoral campaign in defence of peace.
Laval and 2,000 others were listed by the military in the Carnet B, a compilation of potentially subversive elements who might hinder mobilisation.
With France's resources geared for war, goods were scarce or overpriced.
Laval scorned the conduct of the war and the poor supply of troops in the field.
The hope of peace in spring 1917 was overwhelmed by discovery of traitors, some real, some imagined, as with Malvy.
Two trials were to be held.
Laval firmly believed that he would be able to convince his fellow-countrymen that he had been acting in their best interests all along.
All three of his lawyers declined to be in court to hear the reading of the formal charges, saying "We fear that the haste which has been employed to open the hearings is inspired, not by judicial preoccupations, but motivated by political considerations."
After the adjournment, Mongibeaux announced that the part of the interrogation dealing with the charge of plotting against the security of the state was concluded.
Although Pierre-Henri Teitgen, the Minister of Justice in Charles de Gaulle's cabinet, personally appealed to Laval's lawyers to have him attend the hearings, he declined to do so.
The execution was fixed for the morning of 15 October at Fresnes Prison.
His corpse was initially buried in an unmarked grave in the Thiais cemetery, until it was buried in the Chambrun family mausoleum at the Montparnasse Cemetery in November [REF].
His daughter, Josée Laval, wrote a letter to Churchill in 1948, suggesting the firing squad who killed her father "wore British uniforms" [REF].
The High Court, which functioned until 1949, judged 108 cases; it pronounced eight death penalties, including one for an elderly Pétain, whose appeal failed.
Laval was born 28 June 1883 at Châteldon, Puy-de-Dôme, in the northern part of Auvergne.
Laval joined the Socialists in 1903, when he was living in Saint-Étienne, 62 km southwest of Lyon.
"I was never a very orthodox socialist", he said in 1945, "by which I mean that I was never much of a Marxist.
Laval returned to Paris in 1907 at the age of 24.
During this period, Laval became familiar with the left-wing doctrines of Georges Sorel and Hubert Lagardelle.
The second Cartel des Gauches (Left-Wing Cartel) was driven from power by the riots of 6 February 1934, staged by fascist, monarchist, and other far-right groups.
At this time, Laval was opposed to Germany, the "hereditary enemy" of France, and he pursued anti-German alliances.
Laval's primary aim during the build-up to the Italo-Abyssinian War was to retain Italy as an anti-German power and not to drive her into Germany's hands by adopting a hostile attitude to an invasion of Abyssinia [REF].
During the Phoney War, Laval's attitude towards the conflict reflected a cautious ambivalence.
On 9 June 1940, the Germans were advancing on a front of more than in length across the entire width of France.
During this time Laval had left Châteldon for Bordeaux, where his daughter nearly convinced him of the necessity of going to the United States.
As the Germans occupied Paris, Pétain was asked to form a new government.
Although the final terms of the armistice were harsh, the French colonial empire was left untouched and the French government was allowed to administer the occupied and unoccupied zones.
By this time, Laval now openly sympathized with fascism.
In October 1940, Laval understood collaboration more or less in the same sense as Pétain.
The meetings between Pétain and Adolf Hitler, and between Laval and Hitler, are often used to show that collaboration with the Nazis.
In November 1940, Laval took a number of pro-German decisions of his own, without consulting with colleagues.
Laval's actions were a factor in his dismissal on 13 December 1940.
On 27 August 1941, several top Vichyites including Laval attended a review of the Légion des Volontaires Français (LVF), a collaborationist militia.
Laval returned to power in April 1942.
Laval's precise role in the deportation of Jews has been hotly debated by both his accusers and defenders.
More and more the insoluble dilemma of collaboration faced Laval and his chief of staff, Jean Jardin.
In 1943, Laval became the nominal leader of the newly created Milice, though its operational leader was Secretary General Joseph Darnand [REF].
When Operation Torch, the landings of Allied forces in North Africa began, Germany occupied all of France.
A few months later, he was arrested by the Germans and transported to Belfort.
Prior to his arrest, Laval had planned to move to Sintra, Portugal, where a house had been leased for him [REF].
In 1919 a conservative wave swept the Bloc National into control.
The General Confederation of Labour (CGT), with 2,400,000 members, launched a general strike in 1920, which petered out as thousands of workers were laid off.
Laval's relations with the Socialist Party drew to an end.
In 1923 Aubervilliers in northern Paris needed a mayor.
Laval won over those he defeated by cultivating personal contacts.
In the 1924 legislative elections, the SFIO and the Radicals formed a national coalition known as the Cartel des Gauches.
Laval's reward for support of the cartel was appointment as Minister of Public Works in the government of Paul Painlevé in April 1925.
Laval's momentum was frozen after 1926 through a reshuffling of the cartel majority orchestrated by the Radical-Socialist mayor and deputy of Lyon, Édouard Herriot.
In 1927 Laval was elected Senator for the Seine, withdrawing from and placing himself above the political battles for majorities in the National Assembly.
On 2 March 1930 Laval returned as Minister of Labour in the second André Tardieu government.
From 1927 to 1930, Laval began to accumulate a sizeable personal fortune; after the war his wealth resulted in charges that he had used his political position to line his own pockets.
Two of the investments which Laval and his backers acquired were provincial newspapers, Le Moniteur du Puy-de-Dôme and its associated printing works at Clermont-Ferrand, and the Lyon Républicain.
More than 150,000 textile workers were on strike, and violence was feared.
Social insurance had been on the agenda for ten years.
When the bill had passed its final stages, Tardieu described his Minister of Labour as "displaying at every moment of the discussion as much tenacity as restraint and ingenuity."[REF] .
Tardieu's government ultimately proved unable to weather the Oustric Affair.
In the words of Léon Blum, the Socialist opposition was amazed and disappointed that the ghost of Tardieu's government reappeared within a few weeks of being defeated with Laval at its head, "like a night bird surprised by the light."
Besides Briand, André Maginot, Pierre-Étienne Flandin, and Paul Reynaud, Laval brought in as his advisors, friends such as Maurice Foulon from Aubervilliers and Pierre Cathala, whom he knew from his days in Bayonne and who had worked in Laval's Labour ministry.
France in 1931 was unaffected by the world economic crisis.
Laval and his cabinet considered the economy and gold reserves as means to diplomatic ends.
In 1931, Austria underwent a banking crisis when its largest bank, the Creditanstalt, was revealed to be nearly bankrupt, threatening a worldwide financial crisis.
The Hoover Moratorium of 1931, a proposal made by American President Herbert Hoover to freeze all intergovernmental debt for a one-year period, was, according to author and political advisor McGeorge Bundy, "the most significant action taken by an American president for Europe since Woodrow Wilson's administration."
The proposed moratorium would also benefit Great Britain's investment in Germany's private sector, making more likely the repayment of those loans while the public indebtedness was frozen.
The scheme was further complicated by ill timing; perceived collusion among the US, Great Britain and Germany, and the fact that it constituted a breach of the Young Plan.
In support of the Hoover Moratorium Laval undertook a year of personal and direct diplomacy by which he traveled to London, Berlin and the United States.
In the United States the conference between Hoover and Laval was an exercise in mutual frustration.
Laval did not get a security pact, without which the French would never consider disarmament, nor did he obtain an endorsement for the political moratorium.
These were meagre political results.
The Salt Roads tells a story of the Ginen fertility god, Lasirén.
The novel begins with the introduction of Mer, a slave and healer on a sugar plantation in St. Domingue.
The second main human character in The Salt Roads is Jeanne Duval, also known as Lemer and Prosper.
Thais, also known as Meritet, Mary, and Pretty Pearl, is the third main human character.
Though the lives of the three human characters are distinct and independent, they are woven together by Lasirén's consciousness and influence.
A great Power of Africa, an lwa, is the fertility god of the Ginen.
Mer describes the goddess as "young, smooth; she was fat and well-fed.
Also referred to as "Matant Mer" (Aunt Mer) and "Maman" (Mother).
"I stick to my work.
"Mer always had a strange way of talking about death .. about how it was good to leave life and flee away from this place where the colourless dead tormented them daily" (pg.
Also referred to as "Lemer" and "Prosper".
"You're dancing well, My Jeanne.
"I am a woman, and I am loved" (pg.
Also referred to as "Pretty Pearl" and "Meritet", she is a young girl sold into prostitution paying her way to freedom in Alexandria, Egypt, 345 C.E.
"she is dark skinned, this beauty, and ruddy like copper.
"this is our life .. we'll work till Tausiris decides to release us" (pg.
"I am determined that we keep going.
Enslavement - The three main characters are essentially the victims of enslavement in many forms.
Jeanne is an entertainer, enslaved by the restrictions of her skin color and the limited opportunities they offer.
Thais is a slave to Tausiris, a tavern owner, and is forced into prostitution and entertainment by her master.
Loss of identity - Jeanne, in an attempt to escape the lifestyle that so embodied lower-class, African women of her time, tries to cover her sense of shame with ornate clothing, fancy hair, and powdered faces.
Racism - Hopkinson deals with the problem of racism in her novel by addressing its ability to denigrate and denounce men and especially women of African heritage.
There are also traces of racism within the African race itself.
"Your mother would name her monstrous, it seems, not beautiful.
Feminism - Mer, Jeanne, and Thais all break the typical roles bounded to a woman.
Jeanne counters the dominance often associated with males in literature.
Thais has a wild and free spirit, and she follows it on a long journey across the sea.
"Lie down with the dog, get up with fleas" (pg.
"People only see what they see" (pg.
"Money' seems to also be a kind of food, and the woman wants for it often" (pg.
"They sometimes say that the maddest fools have been touched by God" (pg.
"Desire makes us all babies again" (pg.
"Do not ask your future, or you will forget to live in your present" (pg.
"Sometimes the machete slips in your hand and cuts you.
"Every act of love, of healing, strikes a blow to the evil we fight" (pg.
"There is a time to fight, fierce as a cornered dog, for your freedom..
The novel moves from first person point of view to third person point of view throughout the whole novel.
Also, the goddess Lasiren speaks from a first person point of view.
There are also times when the story is told from a third person point of view.
The story takes place in multiple settings, switching from character to character as well as place to place.
Jeanne's story takes place in Paris and Neuilly, France during the 1840s.
Thais' story is set in Alexandria, Egypt and Aelia Capitolina, or Jerusalem, during 345 C.E. .
This book is a work of historical fiction.
Excerpts from the poem "The Balcony" are reprinted from The Poems and Prose Poems of Charles Baudelaire, ed.
Excerpts from the letters of Charles Baudelaire to Apollonie Sabatier adapted from The Letters of Baudelaire, translated by Arthur Symons.
Translation of Le Serpent qui danse, The Snake That Dances, by Patrick Barnard, 2003, Canada.
Women of Caribbean area Saint Mary of Egypt Genen Gods and Goddesses Makandal's Rebellion Jeanne Duval .
Jules Verne Charles Baudelaire .
Spirit possession Time travel .
Water- Water is where Lasiren lives.
Salt- Salt is a unifying element of the women in the novel.
"Salt tears sprang from my eyes, I could feel them" (Mer- pg.
"At the binding taste of salt, I begin to fall once more" (Lasiren- pg.
"Georgine let the salt water run freely from her eyes" (pg.
"I wriggled up beside her and held her until she was still again.
"I was born in brackish water, salty as tears.
For the Ginen people, salt is a way to humble yourself to the gods.
"If you only eat unsalted food, fresh food, we believe you make Lasiren vexed, for salt is the creatures of the sea, and good for the Ginen to eat, but fresh-fresh is the flesh of Lasiren, and if you eat that, it's pride" (pg.
Hopkinson employs a simple yet dramatic style through fragmented, bolded, and first-person sentences.
"The warmth of the drug spread all through my body, bringing blissful ease to my cramping belly" (pg.
"Simenon's demon's eyes of sky glittered" (pg.
"Do you wish to climb aboard me, straddle my waist, slip your cremorne into my mouth?" (pg.
"..brown like rich riverbank mud.." (pg.
"Grunting like a great lazy pig.." (pg.
"I sink once more to the cage of Jeanne's brain" (pg.
"And she knows what a scandalous black feather she makes in the cap of this bohemian.." (pg.
"With that axe slash, the river the mighty rolling river that is one Ginen story crashes full tilt into a dam" (pg.
Using both similes and metaphors, Hopkinson gives the text a richness that echoes its bold text and vivid images.
Hopkinson's use of the many distinct perspectives serves to illustrate the varied views of each of the characters in their respective situations.
Tipingee - Slave on the Saint Domingue plantation that belongs to Seigneur Simenon.
"Tipingee curled her rebellious toes under, but the music just went dancing along her spine, begging it to move and away in time" (pg.
Georgine- A young slave girl who gets pregnant by a white carpenter man a few months after she comes of age.
Makandal - Slave on the Saint Domingue plantation.
"There is another power; this Ogu.
Patrice - Slave on the Saint Domingue plantation.
"Few more days, and you realise you're walking different.
Ti-Bois - Child slave on the Saint Domingue plantation.
Charles Baudelaire - Lover of Jeanne Duval.
Lisette - Entertainer and prostitute.
"Yes, I suppose it is.
Joël - Stepbrother of Jeanne, although their relationship is questionable because of their sexual tendencies.
"He said nothing, but he thumped th wall as he strode out.
Moustique - Chef and owner of restaurant.
Judah - Friend of Thais who works as a male prostitute in Tausiris' tavern.
"Giving his loving away for free, he was, since he was earning his money in other ways.
Antoniou - Frequent patron of Thais.
"He was a good man, Antoniou.
Priest Zosimus - Priest who finds Thais and Judah in the desert.
"He looked at me as though I were a leper.
The walk up the Tor to the distinctive tower at the summit (the partially restored remains of an old church) is rewarded by vistas of the mid-Somerset area, including the Levels which are drained marshland.
The low-lying damp ground can produce a visual effect known as a Fata Morgana.
Glastonbury is less than across the River Brue from the village of Street.
Until the 13th century, the direct route to the sea at Highbridge was prevented by gravel banks and peat near Westhay [REF].
The Ham Wall National Nature Reserve, 4km west of Glastonbury, is managed by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds [REF].
The Whitelake River rises between two low limestone ridges to the north of Glastonbury, part of the southern edge of the Mendip Hills.
Glastonbury has been the birthplace or home to many notable people.
The religious connections and mythology of the town have also attracted several authors.
Popular entertainment and literature is also represented amongst the population.
Athletes and sports players have also been resident.
Glastonbury is notable for myths and legends concerning Joseph of Arimathea, the Holy Grail and King Arthur.
The legend that Joseph of Arimathea retrieved certain holy relics was introduced by the French poet Robert de Boron in his 13th-century version of the grail story, thought to have been a trilogy though only fragments of the later books survive today.
De Boron's account relates how Joseph captured Jesus' blood in a cup (the "Holy Grail") which was subsequently brought to Britain.
In 1191, monks at the abbey claimed to have found the graves of Arthur and Guinevere to the south of the Lady Chapel of the Abbey Church, which was visited by a number of contemporary historians including Giraldus Cambrensis [REF].
An early Welsh poem links Arthur to the Tor in an account of a confrontation between Arthur and Melwas, who had kidnapped Queen Guinevere [REF].
Joseph is said to have arrived in Glastonbury by boat over the flooded Somerset Levels.
The original Holy Thorn was a centre of pilgrimage in the Middle Ages but was chopped down during the English Civil War [REF].
Today Glastonbury Abbey presents itself as "traditionally the oldest above-ground Christian church in the world," which according to the legend was built at Joseph's behest to house the Holy Grail, 65 or so years after the death of Jesus [REF].
In 1934 artist Katherine Maltwood suggested a landscape zodiac, a map of the stars on a gigantic scale, formed by features in the landscape such as roads, streams and field boundaries, could be found situated around Glastonbury [REF].
The town council is made up of 16 members,[REF] and is based at the Town Hall, Magdalene Street.
Glastonbury is in the local government district of Mendip, which is part of the county of Somerset.
The town's retained fire station is operated by Devon and Somerset Fire and Rescue Service,[REF] whilst police and ambulance services are provided by Avon and Somerset Constabulary and the South Western Ambulance Service.
There are 4 electoral wards within Glastonbury having in total the same population as is mentioned above.
Glastonbury falls within the Wells constituency, represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom.
Glastonbury is twinned with the Greek island of Patmos,[REF] and Lalibela, Ethiopia [REF].
According to the Glastonbury Conservation Area Appraisal of July 2010, there are approximately 170 listed buildings or structures in the town's designated conservation area, of which eight are listed grade I, six are listed grade II* and the remainder are listed grade II [REF].
The Tribunal was a medieval merchant's house, used as the Abbey courthouse and, during the Monmouth Rebellion trials, by Judge Jeffreys [REF].
The octagonal Market Cross was built in 1846 by Benjamin Ferrey [REF].
The George Hotel and Pilgrims' Inn was built in the late 15th century to accommodate visitors to Glastonbury Abbey, which is open to visitors.
The Somerset Rural Life Museum is a museum of the social and agricultural history of Somerset, housed in buildings surrounding a 14th-century barn once belonging to Glastonbury Abbey.
The Chalice Well is a holy well at the foot of the Tor, covered by a wooden well-cover with wrought-iron decoration made in 1919.
Just a short distance from the Chalice Well site, across a road known as Well House Lane, can be found the "White Spring", where a temple has been created in the 21st century.
The building now used as the White Spring Temple was originally a Victorian-built well house, erected by the local water board in 1872.
During the 7th millennium BCE the sea level rose and flooded the valleys and low-lying ground surrounding Glastonbury so the Mesolithic people occupied seasonal camps on the higher ground, indicated by scatters of flints [REF].
Glastonbury Lake Village was an Iron Age village, close to the old course of the River Brue, on the Somerset Levels near Godney, some north west of Glastonbury.
Sharpham Park is a historic park, west of Glastonbury, which dates back to the Bronze Age.
The origin of the name Glastonbury is unclear but when the settlement is first recorded in the 7th and the early 8th century, it was called Glestingaburg [REF].
Hugh Ross Williamson cites a tale about St. Collen, one of the earliest hermits to inhabit the Tor before the Abbey was built by St. Patrick, which has the Saint summoned by the King of the Fairies, Gwyn, to the summit of the Tor.
William of Malmesbury in his De Antiquitate Glastonie Ecclesie gives the Old Celtic Ineswitrin (or Ynys Witrin) as its earliest name,[REF] and asserts that the founder of the town was the eponymous Glast, a descendant of Cunedda [REF].
Centwine (676-685) was the first Saxon patron of Glastonbury Abbey [REF].
To the southwest of the town centre is Beckery, which was once a village in its own right but is now part of the suburbs.
Sharpham Park was granted by King Eadwig to the then abbot Æthelwold in 957.
In the 1070s St Margaret's Chapel was built on Magdelene Street, originally as a hospital and later as almshouses for the poor.
During the Middle Ages the town largely depended on the abbey but was also a centre for the wool trade until the 18th century.
During the Second Cornish Uprising of 1497 Perkin Warbeck surrendered when he heard that Giles, Lord Daubeney's troops, loyal to Henry VII were camped at Glastonbury [REF].
In 1693 Glastonbury, Connecticut was founded and named after the English town from which some of the settlers had emigrated.
The Somerset towns charter of incorporation was received in 1705 [REF].
By the middle of the 19th century the Glastonbury Canal drainage problems and competition from the new railways caused a decline in trade, and the town's economy became depressed [REF].
In the Northover district industrial production of sheepskins, woollen slippers and, later, boots and shoes,[REF] developed in conjunction with the growth of C&J Clark in Street.
During the 19th and 20th centuries tourism developed based on the rise of antiquarianism, the association with the abbey and mysticism of the town [REF].
Glastonbury received national media coverage in 1999 when cannabis plants were found in the town's floral displays [REF].
The Glastonbury Canal ran just over 14mi through two locks from Glastonbury to Highbridge where it entered the Bristol Channel in the early 19th century,[REF] but it became uneconomic with the arrival of the railway in the 1840s [REF].
Glastonbury and Street railway station was the biggest station on the original Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway main line from Highbridge to Evercreech Junction until closed in 1966 under the Beeching axe.
The nearest railway station is at Castle Cary but there is no direct bus route linking it to Glastonbury.
The main road in the town is the A39 which passes through Glastonbury from Wells connecting the town with Street and the M5 motorway.
Glastonbury may have been a site of religious importance in pre-Christian times [REF].
The abbey had a violent end during the Dissolution and the buildings were progressively destroyed as their stones were removed for use in local building work.
The Church of St Benedict was rebuilt by Abbot Richard Beere in about 1520 [REF].
Described as "one of the most ambitious parish churches in Somerset",[REF] the current Church of St John the Baptist dates from the 15th century and has been designated as a Grade I listed building [REF].
In the centuries that followed the Reformation, many religious denominations came to Glastonbury to establish chapels and meeting houses.
The United Reformed Church on the High Street was built in 1814 and altered in 1898.
Glastonbury Methodist Church on Lambrook Street was built in 1843 and has a galleried interior, typical of a non-conformist chapel of that period, but an unusual number of stained glass windows.
The Methodist Church on Lambrook street was originally the Glastonbury Wesleyan Methodist Chapel.
The Catholic Church of Our Lady St Mary of Glastonbury was built, on land near to the Abbey, in 1939.
The Bove Town Gospel Hall was registered for the solemnizing of marriages in 1964[REF] This has been a place of worship in the town since at least 1889, when it was listed as a mission of the Plymouth Brethren [REF].
In April 2012, it was reported by The Guardian newspaper that, according to the Pilgrim Reception Centre in the town, Glastonbury had around seventy different faith groups.
The pagan Glastonbury Goddess Temple was founded in 2002 and registered as a place of worship the following year.
The 22nd Jagannatha Ratha-yatra Krishna Festival took place in Glastonbury on Sunday 4 October 2015.
Sufism has been long established in Glastonbury.
The Glastonbury Order of Druids was formed on Mayday 1988 [REF].
Glastonbury has a particular significance for members of the Bahá'í Faith in that Wellesley Tudor Pole, founder of the Chalice Well Trust, was one of the earliest and most prominent adherents of this faith in the United Kingdom.
Glastonbury has been described as a New Age community where communities have grown up to include people with New Age beliefs [REF].
In a 1904 novel by Charles Whistler entitled A Prince of Cornwall Glastonbury in the days of Ine of Wessex is portrayed.
The first Glastonbury Festivals were a series of cultural events held in summer, from 1914 to 1926.
The more recent Glastonbury Festival of Performing Arts, founded in 1970, is now the largest open-air music and performing arts festival in the world.
The Children's World charity grew out of the festival and is based in the town.
Glastonbury is one of the venues for the annual West Country Carnival [REF].
The local football team is Glastonbury Town F.C.
Glastonbury Cricket Club competes in the West of England Premier League, one of the ECB Premier Leagues, the highest level of recreational cricket in England and Wales [REF].
The town is on the route of the Samaritans Way South West.
More than 30 majors are offered at the Daytona Beach campus, including Aeronautical Science, Aerospace Engineering, Human Factors Psychology, Homeland Security, Engineering Physics, Safety Science, and various Business programs [REF].
The Daytona Beach campus has a fleet of 42 Cessna Skyhawks, 7 Piper Arrows, 10 Diamond DA42 IV's, and the Super Decathlon.
Embry-Riddle's largest residential campus () and academic headquarters has been in Daytona Beach, Florida since the move from Miami in 1965.
The university's 185-acre eastern campus is located in Daytona Beach, Florida.
All first-year students live on campus with sophomores, juniors, and seniors.
Embry-Riddle's Daytona Beach campus has one of the most extensive Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) programs in the United States and the nation's largest Air Force ROTC program [REF].
The university is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools to award degrees at both residential campuses as well as through Embry-Riddle Worldwide at the associate, bachelor, master's, and doctoral levels [REF].
The programs in Aeronautics, Air Traffic Management, Applied Meteorology, and Aerospace Studies are certified by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) [REF].
In May 2014, the U.S. News & World Report ranked Embry-Riddle Worldwide one of the nation's top online educators for veterans [REF].
The Embry-Riddle Athletics administration announced in July 2014 that the University has been accepted into the NCAA Division II membership process [REF].
In July, the university also became the nation's first FAA-approved training provider for student airline certification [REF].
Administration announced in July 2014 that Embry-Riddle has been accepted into the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division II membership process [REF].
In June, the Athletics program at the Daytona Beach Campus won the Sun Conference Commissioner's Cup for the 15th straight year [REF].
Facilities At the Prescott Campus, the athletics area takes up the western part of campus and includes the fitness center, gymnasiums, varsity soccer field and track, and recreation fields.
The Athletics Center was also recently renovated with new a Fitness Center and locker rooms.
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University-Prescott opened in 1978.
The flight training center is at nearby Ernest A. Love Field.
The Prescott campus offers the only Global Security and Intelligence Studies program in the US.
The First Year Experience program is designed to help students transition to college on academic, social, and educational levels.
Embry-Riddle's two Air Force ROTC detachments form the largest university-based Air Force commissioning source in the nation.
The Prescott campus is home to the Golden Eagles Flight Team, which competes in the National Intercollegiate Flying Association.
Students submitting SAT/ACT test scores are considered first-time degree/certificate seeking students.
The average freshman retention rate, an indicator of student satisfaction, is 76.5 percent [REF].
The average unweighted academic GPA of students currently enrolled to graduate in 2018 is 3.41.
Regional Universities South - Tie - 12th Best Colleges for Veterans - 8th .
Best Engineering Programs (At schools whose highest degree is a doctorate) - Tie - 84th Best Graduate Engineering Schools - Tie - 104th Aerospace/Aeronautical/Astronautical (At schools whose highest degree is a doctorate) - Tie - 16th .
Best Online Bachelor's Programs - 1st Best Online MBA Programs - Tie - 100th Best Online Graduate Business Programs (Excluding MBA) - Tie - 55th .
Daytona Beach While rooted in aviation, research at Embry-Riddle's Daytona Beach Campus has expanded to include a diverse range of areas, including engineering, cyber and homeland security, human factors, modeling and simulation, and business.
The university is expanding its partnerships with industry in developing the Aerospace Research and Technology Park adjacent to the Daytona Beach campus.
Prescott At the Prescott Campus, a total of $60,000 in Eagle-Prize (E-Prize) Grants is available each year for student teams participating in collegiate, national or international design or research competitions.
Ignite Grants, part of Embry-Riddle's Quality Enhancement Plan, are available up to $48,000 annually for students wishing to participate in research and innovation under the tutelage of a faculty mentor [REF].
On December 17, 1925 Talton Higbee Embry and John Paul Riddle founded the Embry-Riddle Company at Lunken Airport in Cincinnati, Ohio.
In 1939 Riddle, John G. McKay and wife Isabel re-established the school in Miami, FL.
Though it began as a regional school for pilots and aircraft mechanics, the University now enrolls nearly 32,000 undergraduate and graduate students annually across all 50 states and 125 nations.
Embry-Riddle Worldwide serves more than 22,000 students online and at 130 campuses in the United States and globally,[REF] more than 90 on military bases and the option to take online courses.
While 93% of graduates are employed or are in graduate school within a year of graduation,[REF] the two largest employers of Embry-Riddle graduates are the U.S. Air Force and the U.S. Army.
Embry-Riddle Worldwide campus was established in 1970 and became a global network of more than 130 learning locations in the United States, Europe, Canada, the Middle East, and Asia,[REF] including military bases [REF].
Greek underwent many sound changes.
For sound changes occurring in Proto-Greek and in Koine Greek, see and [[Koine Greek phonology]].
In Proto-Greek, the PIE sibilant became by [[debuccalization]] in many cases [REF].
Clusters of and a [[sonorant]] (liquid or nasal) at the beginning of a word became a voiceless resonant in some forms of Archaic Greek.
The PIE semivowel , IPA , was sometimes debuccalized and sometimes [[fortition|strengthened]] initially.
* ('I release, I will release, I released') .
In some cases, the sound in Attic corresponds to the sound in other dialects.
Mycenaean Greek had three [[labialized velar consonant|labialized velar stops]] , aspirated, tenuis, and voiced.
Near or , the labialized velars had already lost their labialization in the Mycenaean period [REF].
Through ''[[psilosis]]'' ('stripping'), from the term for lack of ([[#Terminology|see below]]), the was lost even at the beginnings of words.
Even later, during the Koine Greek period, disappeared totally from Greek and never reappeared, resulting in Modern Greek not possessing this phoneme at all.
The Classical Greek aspirated and voiced stops changed to voiceless and voiced [[fricative consonant|fricatives]] during the period of Koine Greek (spirantization, a form of [[lenition]]).
Spirantization of occurred earlier in Laconian Greek.
In Attic, Ionic, and Doric, vowels were usually lengthened when a following consonant was lost.
Wherever the digraphs correspond to original diphthongs they are called "genuine diphthongs", in all other cases, they are called "[[spurious diphthong]]s" [REF].
In Attic, some cases of long vowels arose through [[contraction (grammar)|contraction]] of adjacent short vowels where a consonant had been lost between them.
Uncontracted forms are found in other dialects, such as in Ionic.
The diphthongs became the long [[monophthong]]s and before the Classical period.
In Archaic Greek, upsilon represented the [[close back rounded vowel|back vowel]] .
During the Classical period, was raised to , and thus took up the empty space of the earlier phoneme.
In early Koine Greek, was fronted and merged with original .
In Attic and Ionic, the Proto-Greek long shifted to .
*Doric and Aeolic , Attic and Ionic ('mother') - compare Latin '''' .
The vowel first shifted to , at which point it was distinct from Proto-Greek long , and then later and merged as .
In Attic, both and Proto-Greek were written as , but they merged to at the end of the 5th century BC.
In addition, words that had original in both Attic and Doric were given false Doric forms with in the choral passages of Athenian plays, indicating that Athenians could not distinguish the Attic-Ionic shifted from original Proto-Greek [REF].
In Attic, is found instead of when the former is found immediately after excluding cases where it once, in older forms of words, wasn't, i.e. when previously, other phonemes had been present between and [REF].
The fact that is found instead of may indicate that earlier, the vowel shifted to in all cases, but then shifted back to after (reversion), or that the vowel never shifted at all in these cases.
When one consonant comes next to another in verb or noun conjugation or word derivation, various [[sandhi]] rules apply.
** This applies fully to stops.
* Before an (future, aorist stem), velars become , labials become , and dentals disappear.
* Before a (aorist passive stem), velars become , labials become , and dentals become .
* Before an (perfect middle first-singular, first-plural, participle), velars become , nasal+velar becomes , labials become , dentals become , other sonorants remain the same.
When precedes , the first consonant assimilates to the second, [[gemination]] takes place, and the combination is pronounced , as in from [[underlying representation|underlying]] .
The sound of zeta develops from original in some cases, and in other cases from .
The above information is based on a large body of evidence which was discussed extensively by linguists and philologists of the 19th and 20th centuries.
When the pronunciation changes, there are two options.
The second option is that the spelling remains the same, while the pronunciation changes.
In a language with a historical spelling system, spelling mistakes indicate change in pronunciation.
* If scribes omit a letter where it would usually be written, or insert it where it does not belong ([[hypercorrection]]), this implies that the sound that the letter represented had been lost in speech.
Greek literature sometimes contains representations of animal cries in Greek letters.
Sounds undergo regular changes, such as assimilation or dissimilation, in certain environments within words, which are sometimes indicated in writing.
* <> at the end of some words are regularly changed to <> when preceding a rough breathing in the next word.
* <> at the end of the first member of composite words are regularly changed to <> when preceding a ''spiritus asper'' in the next member of the composite word.
Morphophonological alternations like the above are often treated differently in non-standard spellings than in standardised literary spelling.
*non-standard epigraphical spelling sometimes indicates assimilation of final to before voiced consonants in a following word, or of final to before aspirated sounds, in words like .
The metres used in Classical Greek poetry are based on the patterns of light and heavy syllables, and can thus sometimes provide evidence as to the length of vowels where this is not evident from the orthography.
Some ancient grammarians attempt to give systematic descriptions of the sounds of the language.
Sometimes the comparison of standard Attic Greek with the written forms of other [[Ancient Greek dialects|Greek dialects]], or the humorous renderings of dialectal speech in Attic theatrical works, can provide hints as to the phonetic value of certain spellings.
The spelling of Greek [[loanword]]s in other languages and [[vice versa]] can provide important hints about pronunciation.
In this regard, Latin is of great value to the reconstruction of ancient Greek phonology because of its close proximity to the Greek world which caused numerous Greek words to be borrowed by the Romans.
For the purpose of borrowing certain other Greek words, the Romans added the letters '''' and '''' to the Latin alphabet, taken directly from the Greek one.
Latin often wrote for Greek .
Sanskrit, Persian, and Armenian also provide evidence.
The quality of short is shown by some transcriptions between Ancient Greek and Sanskrit.
The Greek alphabet developed from the older [[Phoenician alphabet]].
The Greek alphabet was in turn the basis of other alphabets, notably the [[Etruscan alphabet|Etruscan]] and [[Coptic alphabet|Coptic]] and later the [[Armenian alphabet|Armenian]], [[Gothic alphabet|Gothic]], and [[Cyrillic script|Cyrillic]].
For example, in Cyrillic, the letter [[ve (Cyrillic)|]] (''ve'') stands for , confirming that beta was pronounced as a fricative by the 9th century AD, while the new letter [[be (Cyrillic)|]] (''be'') was invented to note the sound .
Any reconstruction of Ancient Greek needs to take into account how the sounds later developed towards Modern Greek, and how these changes could have occurred.
Systematic relationships between sounds in Greek and sounds in other Indo-European languages are taken as strong evidence for reconstruction by historical linguists, because such relationships indicate that these sounds may go back to an inherited sound in the proto-language.
[[Archaic Greek alphabets|Many different forms of the Greek alphabet]] were used for the regional dialects of the Greek language during the Archaic and early Classical periods.
was written with [[sigma]] .
Voiceless is usually written with the ''spiritus asper'' as and transcribed as ''rh'' in Latin.
The [[Close front rounded vowel|close front rounded]] vowels and (an evolution of and respectively) are both represented in writing by the letter [[upsilon]] () irrespective of length.
In Classical Attic, the spellings and represented respectively the vowels and (the latter being an evolution of ), from [[#Monophthongization|original diphthongs]], [[#Compensatory lengthening|compensatory lengthening]], or [[#Contraction|contraction]].
The above information about the usage of the vowel letters applies to the classical orthography of Attic, after Athens took over the orthographic conventions of the Ionic alphabet in 403 BC.
In the Old Attic alphabet, was written with the letterform of [[eta]] .
Ancient Greek words were divided into syllables.
In dividing words into syllables, each vowel or diphthong belongs to one syllable.
Any remaining consonants are added at the end of a syllable.
Syllables in Ancient Greek were either [[syllable weight|light or heavy]].
A syllable ending in a short vowel, or the diphthongs and in certain noun and verb endings, was light.
Greek grammarians called heavy syllables ('long', singular ), and placed them in two categories.
Poetic meter shows which syllables in a word counted as heavy, and knowing syllable weight allows us to determine how consonant clusters were divided between syllables.
In Attic poetry, syllables before a cluster of a stop and a liquid or nasal are commonly light rather than heavy.
In Attic Greek, any single consonant and many [[consonant cluster]]s can occur as a [[Syllable#Onset|syllable onset]] (the beginning of a syllable).
In Ancient Greek, any vowel may end a word, but the only consonants that may normally [[Syllable#Coda|end a word]] are .
Ancient grammarians, such as Aristotle in his ''[[Poetics (Aristotle)|Poetics]]'' and [[Dionysius Thrax]] in his [[Art of Grammar]], categorized letters () according to what speech sounds ( 'elements') they represented.
All the Greek terms for letters or sounds are [[nominalization|nominalized]] adjectives in the [[grammatical gender|neuter gender]], to agree with the neuter nouns and , since they were used to modify the nouns, as in ('pronounceable element') or ('unpronounceable letters').
were [[calque|loan-translated]] into Latin as ''''.
The categories of vowel letters were ('two-time, short, long').
The categories and roughly correspond to the modern terms ''continuant'' and ''stop''.
Stops were divided into three categories using the adjectives ('thick'), ('thin'), and ('middle'), as shown in the table below.
The glottal fricative was originally called ('breath'), and the sound was classified as a , the category to which the acute, grave, and circumflex accents also belong.
In the table below, the phonemes of standard Attic are unmarked, allophones are enclosed in parentheses.
Ancient Greek had nine stops.
was a voiceless coronal sibilant.
According to W.S. Allen, zeta in Attic Greek likely represented the consonant cluster , phonetically .
Ancient Greek has the liquids and , written and respectively.
The letter lambda probably represented a lateral ("clear") as in Modern Greek and most European languages, rather than a velarized ("dark") as in English in coda position.
The letter rho was pronounced as an alveolar trill , as in Italian or Modern Greek rather than as in standard varieties of English or French.
The semivowels were not present in standard Attic Greek at the beginnings of words.
The labio-velar approximant at the beginning of a syllable survived in some non-Attic dialects, such as Arcadian and Aeolic; a voiceless labio-velar approximant probably also occurred in Pamphylian and Boeotian.
Evidence from the poetic meter of Homer suggests that also occurred in the Archaic Greek of the Iliad and Odyssey, although they would not have been pronounced by Attic speakers and are not written in the Attic-influenced form of the text.
In the table below the scansion of the examples is shown with the breve for light syllables, the macron for heavy ones, and the pipe for the divisions between metrical feet.
Gemination was lost in Standard Modern Greek, so that all consonants that used to be geminated are pronounced as singletons.
A doubled in Attic corresponds to a in Ionic and other dialects.
Ancient Greek had a pitch accent, unlike the stress accent of Modern Greek and English.
In the examples below, long vowels and diphthongs are represented with two vowel symbols, one for each mora.
The accented mora is marked with acute accent .
[[Greek diacritics|Accent marks]] were never used until around 200 BC.
The acute represented high or rising pitch, the circumflex represented falling pitch, but what the grave represented is uncertain [REF].
Later on, a grave was only used to replace a final acute before another full word; the acute was kept before an enclitic or at the end of a phrase.
Ancient Greek was a pluricentric language, consisting of many dialects.
The pluricentric nature of Ancient Greek differs from that of Latin, which was composed of basically one variety from the earliest Old Latin texts until Classical Latin.
The main dialect groups of Ancient Greek are Arcadocypriot, Aeolic, Doric, Ionic, and Attic.
Of the main dialects, all but Arcadocypriot have literature in them.
Most of the East Greek dialects palatalized or assibilated to before .
Arcadocypriot was one of the first Greek dialects in Greece.
Aeolic is closely related to Arcadocypriot.
Boeotian underwent vowel shifts similar to those that occurred later in Koine Greek, converting to , to ,[REF] and to [REF].
Homeric or Epic Greek, the literary form of Archaic Greek used in the epic poems, Iliad and the Odyssey, is based on early Ionic and Aeolic, with Arcadocypriot forms.
The Doric dialect, the most important member of West Greek, originated from western Greece.
Attic and Ionic share a vowel shift not present in any other East or West Greek dialects.
Ionic was spoken around the Aegean Sea, including in Ionia, a region of Anatolia south of Aeolis, for which it was named.
Attic is the standard dialect taught in modern introductory courses in Ancient Greek, and the one that has the most literature written in it.
Koine, the form of Greek spoken during the Hellenistic period, was primarily based on Attic Greek, with some influences from other dialects.
Tsakonian, a modern form of Greek mutually unintelligible with Standard Modern Greek, derived from the Laconian variety of Doric, and is therefore the only surviving descendant of a non-Attic dialect.
Archaic and Classical Greek vowels and diphthongs varied by dialect.
The close and open short vowels were similar in quality to the corresponding long vowels [REF].
Proto-Greek close back rounded shifted to front early in Attic and Ionic, around the 6th or 7th century BC (see below) [REF].
The situation with the mid vowels was more complex.
By the mid-4th century BC, the close-mid back shifted to , partly because had shifted to [REF].
In Latin, on the other hand, all short vowels except for were much more open than the corresponding long vowels.
In Attic, the open-mid and close-mid each have three main origins.
In a few cases, the long close-mid vowels developed from [[#Monophthongization|monophthongization]] of the pre-Classical falling diphthongs .
In both Aeolic and Doric, Proto-Greek did not shift to .
Attic had many diphthongs, all [[Diphthong#Falling and rising|falling diphthongs]] with as the second [[semivowel|semivocalic element]], and either with a short or long first element.
The most common diphthongs were [REF] and .
In the tables below, the diphthongs that were monophthongized in most cases are preceded by an asterisk, and the rarer diphthongs are in parentheses.
The diphthong merged with the long close front rounded vowel in Koine.
In the diphthongs , the offglide became a consonant in Koine Greek, and they became Modern Greek .
Until the 15th century (during the time of the Byzantine Greek Empire) ancient Greek texts were pronounced exactly like contemporary Greek when they were read aloud.
[[Johann Reuchlin]], the leading Greek scholar in the West around 1500, had taken his Greek learning from Byzantine émigré scholars, and continued to use the modern pronunciation.
Erasmus' reconstruction was based on a wide range of arguments, derived from the philological knowledge available at his time.
Erasmus also took great pains to assign to the members in his reconstructed system plausible phonetic values.
The reception of Erasmus' idea among his contemporaries was mixed.
A renewed interest in the issues of reconstructed pronunciation arose during the 19th century.
Comparative linguistics led to a picture of ancient Greek that more or less corroborated Erasmus' view, though with some modifications.
In this context, the freshly emerging evidence from the non-standard inscriptions became of decisive importance.
Since the 1970s and 1980s, several scholars have attempted a systematic re-evaluation of the inscriptional and papyrological evidence (Smith 1972, Teodorsson 1974, 1977, 1978; Gignac 1976; Threatte 1980, summary in Horrocks 1999).
Recently, there has been one attempt at a more radically revisionist, anti-Erasmian reconstruction, proposed by the theologian and philologist Chrys Caragounis, Professor Emeritus at [[Lund University]] (1995, 2004).
00. "The Needle Drop (Here Comes Trouble)" .
14. "Borderline (An Ode to Self Care)" (featuring Q-Tip) (produced by Q-Tip & Solange) .
05. "We're Both Wrong" (featuring Saigon) .
(All songs co-produced by Blair Wells.)
04. "Listen" (featuring Q-Tip) (produced by Jay Dee & Q-Tip) .
(All songs produced by Jay Dee & Q-Tip, except where noted.)
10. "Get Involved" (performed and produced by Raphael Saadiq & Q-Tip) .
B1. "We Live This (Dirty)" (Q-Tip version) .
B5. "Truc D'MC (Remix)" (performed by Faf Larage & Vasquez Lusi) .
04. "Megamix (Love to Infinity Edit)" (produced by Raphael Saadiq & Q-Tip, additional production by Love to Infinity) .
01. "Chain Heavy" (featuring Consequence & Talib Kweli) .
00. "Mama's Boyfriend" (Q-Tip version) .
09. "Betcha Wouldn't Hurt Me" (featuring Mary J. Blige, Q-Tip & Alfredo Rodríguez) (produced by Q-Tip & Quincy Jones) .
01. "Honey" (produced by Mariah Carey, Puff Daddy, Stevie J & Q-Tip) .
B1. "Let Me Be the One (Ummah Remix Featuring Q-Tip)" (featuring Q-Tip) .
04. "Happy (Q-Tip Remix Dub)" .
10. "Same Ol' Thing" (performed by A Tribe Called Quest) .
02. "Wild Hot" (performed by Busta Rhymes & A Tribe Called Quest) .
08. "Ill Vibe" (featuring Q-Tip) .
07. "Illusions (Q-Tip Remix)" .
06. "3 MCs" (featuring Q-Tip) .
17. "Ital (The Universal Side)" (featuring Q-Tip) (produced by The Grand Negaz, co-produced by Q-Tip) .
13. "Peace, Prosperity & Paper" (performed by A Tribe Called Quest) .
17. "Everybody Get (Remix)" .
A1. "Temperature's Rising (Remix)" (featuring Crystal Johnson) .
B3. "It Ain't Safe" .
22. "Glamour and Glitz" (performed by A Tribe Called Quest) .
A2. "Get Down (Q-Tip Remix)" (featuring Q-Tip) .
B1. "The World Is Yours (Tip Mix)" .
01. "Crooklyn" (performed by Crooklyn Dodgers) .
A2. "On the Road Again (My Jimmy Weighs a Ton) (Q-Tip Remix)" (featuring Q-Tip) .
02. "Come on Everybody" (featuring Q-Tip) .
05. "Who Planned It" (featuring Q-Tip) .
A2. "Roadrunner (Puberty Mix)" .
19. "K.I.S.S. (Keep It Simple Stupid)" (produced by Diamond D, co-produced by Q-Tip) .
B1. "Scenario (Remix)" (featuring Kid Hood & Leaders of the New School) .
12. "Hot Sex" (performed by A Tribe Called Quest) .
In regards to conception and pregnancy, young Inuit woman were discouraged from engaging in sexual intercourse during puberty, ages 11 to 13 years, until they reached "prime maternity age", after marriage, about 15.
To prevent miscarriage, the husband and camp were to assure that the woman did not become mentally stressed or exhausted during the pregnancy.
In pregnancy, women's care was traditionally guided by the taboos, known as pittailiniq, from the elders in the community.
In interviews with Inuit elders, numerous pittailiniq about the woman's activity and behavior in pregnancy are discussed.
Don't put anything bowl-shaped on your head so the placenta won't get stuck on the baby's head [REF].
The Inuit also followed many taboos (pittailiniq) about diet and consumption in pregnancy.
The pittailiniq regarding the diet of pregnant women demonstrate the strong emphasis on maternal diet affecting infant beauty and/or appearance.
When eating, be sure to finish the meal and lick the plate.
According to elders, the women were not taught how to prepare for birth.
According to elders, birth ideally occurred with both an assistant and midwife, but due to hunting-based economy/survival, many births occurred in transit or at a hunting camp.
In the community, a midwife (Kisuliuq, Sanariak) or "maker" was a highly revered female member of the community, who had acquired experience and skills in birth by attending births with their mother, an elder, or other midwife of the community; often beginning at young age [REF].
In most communities, a man only became intentionally involved in a birth if he was a angakkuq.
Labour and birth were times of great celebration in the Inuit community [REF].
The midwife's goals during labour typically included, keeping the woman from becoming irritable or screaming, preventing her legs from opening, preventing her from having peeing or having a bowel movement, and encouraging activity and position changes.
In traditional Inuit birth culture, the birth event was handled almost exclusively by the midwife [REF].
Once the baby had crowned and was born, the midwife would cut the still-pulsating umbilical cord with a special knife and tie it with caribou sinew [REF].
Sources on traditional Inuit birth practices provide little reference to the postpartum period.
In regards to physical care after birth, the information is also minimal.
It is extremely important for the territorial government of Nunavut to look at ways to clearly rise the national product, which also means to conciliate the Inuit's deeply rooted tradition with the challenges of modern life.
Given all of the above, the central task of the territorial leadership is the conciliation of tradition and modern life.
The backlog of education and training is still immense.
Between 1800 and 1950, the culture and way of living of the Canadian Inuit, who had not known any monetary system before, changed fundamentally.
Post-World War II, the northern regions were increasingly incorporated into a Cold War strategic defense concept, and military and radar stations of the Distant Early Warning Line (DEW Line) were established.
The Canadian state had primarily scientific interest in its northern regions during the first half of the century.
By the mid-1950s, dramatic changes had occurred for the Canadian Inuit, which lasted well into the 1960s.
The Second World War and subsequent Cold War initiated a newfound interest in the Arctic by the Canadian government [REF].
So common was the fly out to give birth that Inuit culture began to adapt to this almost inevitable fact.
In the early 21st century, about half of Inuit women are flown out from Nunavut to southern hospitals for delivery, and evacuations consume more than 20% of the territory's health budget [REF].
During a period of five thousand years, the Eskimo groups have grown apart ethnically.
During the 1980s and 1990s a nationalistic trend could indeed be felt, and there was no lack of wishful thinking to achieve the dream of circumpolar unity.
With all efforts to preserve and cultivate cultural values of the past, the Inuit also want the progress of the modern industrial society.
The Canadian Inuit, just like the other indigenous peoples (First Nations and Métis people) of Canada, grew the demand for collective ethnic rights and a territory of their own, with a government composed of their kind, and Inuktitut as one of the official languages.
An accord, the James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement, between the Canadian federal government, the Province of Quebec and Inuit representatives resulted in the establishment of the Kativik Regional Government and gave a bigger political autonomy to the Nunavik region.
An important chapter of Canadian Arctic policy regarding development of the Inuit culture is reflected in the agreements settling Inuit land claims opposed to the Canadian state.
The Nunavut Land Claims Agreement signed in 1993 with the Tunngavik Federation of Nunavut is the most comprehensive agreement ever reached in Canada.
Also in the north of the province of Quebec, land claims of Inuit groups were settled successfully.
Archaeologists are certain that the predecessors of today's Inuit originated in the area of the Bering Strait, which separates Asia and North America.
Pre-Dorset culture is said to begin when the Paleo-Eskimos settled on the islands of the Canadian archipelago and northern Greenland.
Independence I culture 2300 BCE-1500 BCE .
This Paleo-Eskimo culture was named after Independence Fjord, where traces of a large settlement were found.
Saqqaq culture 2400-900 BCE .
In the western and southern parts of the eastern coast of Greenland, the Saqqaq culture developed around 2300 BCE and lasted 1500 years.
Independence II culture 800/600-1 BC .
Presumably for climatic reasons, northern Greenland was not populated for about 500 years afterward.
The range of distribution of the Independence II people approximately corresponds to that of the Independence I people.
Archaeological research has focused its fieldwork on areas of Greenland below 83 degrees latitude north for traces of the Independence II culture.
Dorset Culture (500 BC-1000 AD) .
Archaeological evidence shows that between 500 BCE and 500 CE, remarkable technological and cultural advances took place in the area of northern Canada and Greenland known as the Dorset region.
Their hunting methods were greatly improved over previous Arctic cultures.
In the next 500 years, known as the Dorset II period, the Dorset culture expanded to occupy the region between Victoria Island in the west to Greenland in the east to Newfoundland in the south.
Ivory carvings date to as early as the Dorset I period, but artistic activity appears to have greatly increased in the Dorset II period.
This period's climate was responsible for the Vikings' naming of Iceland and Greenland, labels that in our times sound paradoxical.
The relatively temperate climate of the Alaska had allowed much greater cultural advances among the peoples there during the 3,000 years since the Pre-Dorset had left the region.
The various peoples of the Alaskan coasts had in that period developed entirely new techniques for hunting and fishing
The warmer climate of North America in 1000 CE increased the amount of habitable territory in the Arctic and contributed to population growth.
The new arrivals were the direct ancestors of today's Inuit.
The typical Thule house was constructed from a framework of whale jawbones and ribs anchored in the tundra soil with rocks.
While the artistic productions of the Dorset were almost exclusively shaped by shamanistic ritual and myths, such influences are barely detectable in Thule art.
Among the art of the Thule, the depictions of bears especially contrasts with the art of the Dorset.
They constructed diverse and numerous Inuksuit (like a man), piled-stone landmarks that survive.
From the beginning of the 14th century, a gradual cooling occurred throughout the Canadian Archipelago and the Arctic Ocean coast of the mainland.
In Greenland, the beginning of the 17th century brought the first European whaling ships and sudden change.
The 19th century is regarded as the beginning of "Inuit culture."
Contact with Europeans was another important impetus for change in the culture of the Inuit.
In contrast, tradesmen, missionaries and representatives of the Canadian administration established themselves in the region and directly influenced the life of the natives.
Starting at the beginning of the 20th century, radical changes occurred for the Arctic people.
In Canada, the Hudson's Bay Company tapped the previously unexplored "Barren Lands" of the Kivalliq Region to the west of Hudson Bay for trade.
The basic social structure of the Inuit in the 19th century consisted of an estimated 50 groups of 200 to 800 members apiece.
Hunting provided the Inuit with a balanced diet and the raw materials for clothing, housing, household implements and heating, boat and sled-building, hunting weapons, toys, and art-objects.
Plant-materials played a small role in Inuit culture, as they were so rare.
The Inuit had developed winter clothing that ensured an effective use of the body heat, avoiding holes that would allow air to leak out.
Many elders still remember the time, more than 60 years ago, when the Inuit lived a nomadic lifestyle.
At the turn to the 20th century, most Inuit still lived in hide tents during the summer.
In the few months of summer, the people moved camp to the estuaries, because there it was easier to catch the favoured Arctic char, e.g. by using artificial weirs, and the eggs of seabirds.
During the winter, the Inuit lived in igloos, which were erected separately or connected by tunnels.
Some of the families that wanted to live in permanent camps, built themselves a partially subsurface home of rocks, whale bones, coat and sod, the so-called qarmaq.
Due to the hard weather conditions in winter, in this season the families joined closer together.
During the warmer seasons, mainly the people used the kayak, or, mostly as "women boat" for families, the large umiak, and travelled by foot.
The Inuit place a high value upon self-determination.
In general, the government of Nunavut sees one of its most important tasks to be the preservation and care of Inuit tradition and culture.
A special part of the centuries-old cultural heritage of the Inuit are their myths and legends, which had been passed exclusively by word of mouth, because the Inuit had no written language and consequently had no literary tradition.
The Inuit did not have a very distinct tradition of music.
Contemporary Inuit art and handicrafts did not come about before the late 1950s as important resources for added value.
The birth of a newborn into the camp is cause for widespread celebration in the community and everyone, including children, would shake hands at its arrival [REF].
Immediately after birth, the infant was assessed for breathing.
Traditional Inuit midwives describe that the first stool (meconium) should be observed outside the womb, as it could cause clotting and complications if left in the mother.
Also occurring immediately after birth, a designated person, often the midwife, felt the infant's genitalia to determine its gender.
Once assessed by the midwife and/or sanaji, the infant was promptly given to the mother for initiation of breastfeeding [REF].
Performed by the sanaji or midwife, the tuqurausiq was the highly valued naming practice that linked the child to a relative or deceased family friend.
Compared with non-Inuit Canadians, Inuit have higher fertility rates, higher prevalence of births to mothers age 15-19 years, and worse birth outcomes [REF].
Traditionally, young Inuit women received little information about puberty, fertility, and pregnancy.
Marriage commonly occurred when the female reached 14-15 years of age and the man reached adulthood, considered around 20 years of age.
Childhood of the Inuit was still very brief the first half of the 20th century.
Before Christianizing (referred to as Siqqitiq by the Inuit), polygamy, more often polygyny, less so polyandry, were not unusual among the Inuit.
However, due to men being required to sometimes travel large distances to obtain food the division was not absolute.
Beginning in the late 1970s and 1980s, women in Nunavut and the other areas of Nunangat began a push to end the practice of being flown to the south of Canada (Douglas- Rankin Inlet).
In 1993, the first birth centre in Nunavut opened its doors in Rankin Inlet.
A second birth centre is housed within the Qikiqtani Hospital in Iqaluit.
When the Inuit still lived in camps or as nomads, they had no special tomb sites, much less cemeteries.
Similar burial customs have been found through the centuries.
The Inuit believed the aurora borealis to be visible signals from the dead or the spirits of the dead.
Since the move to the settlements, the dead are buried in cemeteries.
Given such changes in their way of life, keeping their own identity and recollection of history and ancestors proved to be an extraordinary challenge many Inuit could not meet.
In the early 21st century the infant mortality rate is still high, about four times higher than the rest of Canada, and the lifespan relatively short, about 13 years less than the rest of the country [REF].
Within a very short time, modern technology replaced methods and technologies that had been passed on for centuries.
The Inuit have become consumers who make their living by fishing, hunting, trapping and production of artwork.
The capitalist way of thinking in the south of Canada has been a large challenge for the Inuit.
The proselytizing by the Anglican Church and the Roman Catholic Church in the first half of the 20th century, which must be critically viewed in some respect, was also of fundamental significance for the cultural change of the Inuit.
The adjustment to life in a modern industrialized country is easier for the young people who find new types of opportunities, but also all the problems that can be paraphrased by the keyword "TV culture".
As part if the Governmemt of Canada's assimilation policy many Inuit children, along with First Nations, were sent to residential schools.
Later in the 1970s schools were built in the communities but most did not go beyond grade 7/8.
In the NWT Aurora College and Arctic College in Nunavut offer education programs throughout the territories.
There has been no lack of intensive effort to find ways for the Inuit into a largely self-designed future, and to help them with a recollection of their own values and of their personal identity.
Big hopes were put into the establishment of cooperatives, today the Arctic Co-operatives Limited, that were to help convey to the Inuit the skills of creating added value, so they would take care of themselves again and at the same time preserve their traditional culture.
The cooperatives developed activities in disparate areas.
In the area of culture, the cooperatives and similar associations were intensely devoted to fostering artistic skills, which were, and still are unusually pronounced among the Inuit.
In 1965, the turnover of Inuit cooperatives with trade of artistic objects and true arts was still below 100,000 Canadian dollars, but two or three decades later it has risen to $5 million, at gross prices, respectively (turnover not registered is estimated at a few additional million dollars).
During her Janet World Tour, Jackson experienced an emotional breakdown, stemming from self-hatred, childhood humiliation, self-harm, and distorted body image [REF].
In self-analysis, Jackson uncovered vital details regarding her past, saying, "Certain things may happen, and you just dismiss them instead of stopping and saying, "Why am I feeling this way?
Jackson developed body dysmorphia as a response to ridicule, stating, "I'd look in the mirror and hate myself.
Her self-hatred accelerated into raging cycles of bulimia and anorexia, repressing the issue until questioned [REF].
The album gained media attention for its explicit themes and exploration of homosexuality, suggested as a "queer-studies thesis."[REF][REF][REF]
The album's "most startling" song was considered "What About," in which Jackson violently confronts domestic abuse [REF].
Jackson's progression into advanced erotic content was criticized, though she defended her material [REF].
The Velvet Rope has received acclaim amongst some criticism since its release.
In his review for The Village Voice, Vince Aletti praised its "unusu-ally busy, electronica- spiked soundscape," revealing "the process of psychic reconstruction" [REF].
The length of The Velvet Rope drew criticism from certain music critics.
The Velvet Rope was titled as a metaphor for the emotional barricade preventing others from revealing their innermost thoughts; in comparison to the velvet rope used at film premieres and award shows, prohibiting access from spectators [REF].
The album's artwork was photographed by Ellen von Unwerth, with additional photos by Mario Testino [REF].
Upon its release, Jackson unveiled an edgier image, flaunting hennaed red hair and tattoos on her neck, wrist, foot, back, and lower thigh; also acquiring nipple, septum, and labia piercings [REF].
"You" samples "The Cisco Kid" by War.
"Got 'til It's Gone" samples "Big Yellow Taxi" by Joni Mitchell.
"My Need" samples "Love Hangover" by Diana Ross and "You're All I Need to Get By" by Marvin Gaye and Tammi Terrell.
"Free Xone" samples "Think (About It)" by Lyn Collins, "Tighten Up" by Archie Bell & the Drells, and "Joyous" by Pleasure.
"Together Again" samples "Bridge Zone" by Yuzo Koshiro.
Album listening parties were held in London and New York City at the Chrysler Building's Art Deco Cloud Room, reopened after sixty-five years for the event [REF].
An album signing was held at the Virgin Megastore in New York [REF].
Jackson embarked on The Velvet Rope Tour, visiting Europe, North America, Japan, New Zealand, Africa, and Australia.
Jackson's showmanship was commended by critics, who also praised the show's theatrics and pyrotechnics [REF].
Pitchfork considered the album a pioneer in pop artists attempting the "rebel record," citing Christina Aguilera's Stripped, Kelly Clarkson's My December, and Rihanna's Rated R to follow its "coming-of-age maneuver."[REF]
] Drew Millard of Vice stated the album "inadvertently predicts most of the cooler trends in contemporary indie music," saying, "Dam-Funk's bedroom-keyb attack?
The Weeknd's Thursday was likened to an attempted "male equivalent" of the record [REF].
Psychologist Alan Downs' book The Velvet Rage was titled after the album and its homosexual content; demonstrating "how to heal the trauma of being a gay man in an uncompromisingly straight world."[REF]
The album was produced by Jackson with Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis, as well as René Elizondo, Jr.
She returned to the studio in January 1997, embarking on a six-and-a-half month recording process [REF].
"Singing these songs has meant digging up pain that I buried a long time ago.
In "Twisted Elegance," Jackson speaks over piano and white noise.
"Got 'til It's Gone" is an alternative pop and trip hop song, featuring folk singer Joni Mitchell and rapper Q-Tip [REF].
"Free Xone" incorporates "slamming funk" with drum and bass, derived from "scratching, sampling, honey rapping, break beats and electronic accents."[REF][REF]
"Tonight's the Night" alludes to sexual anticipation, suggesting a lesbian encounter and potential threesome during its finale [REF].
In piano ballad "Special," Jackson speaks to her inner child, spreading the message that "pain is not permanent," but rather, transformed.
Early Christianity was relatively pacifist [REF].
The early Christians anticipated the eminent return of the Lord in glory, even to the extant that Paul had to tell some of them to get back to work.
St. Paul wrote, "Let every person be subordinate to the higher authorities, for there is no authority except from God, and those that exist have been established by God...This is why you also pay taxes, for the authorities are ministers of God, devoting themselves to this very thing.
The early Christian church believed that Christians should not take up arms in any war,[REF] and so struggled attempting to balance the obligation to be a good citizen and the question of whether it was permissible to take up arms to defend one's country.
As early as second century, Christians began to participate in Roman military, police, and government in large numbers [REF].
From about the middle of the second century, officers in the Roman army were expected to participate in the Imperial Cult and sacrifice to the emperor.
Among the better-known soldier saints are St.
Persecutions were sporadic and the third century, largely local.
The sufferings of the martyrs were therefore not an act of suicide or some masochistic form of passive weakness that found its fulfillment in torture and death at the hands of the Romans.
The Martyrs of Córdoba were forty-eight Christian martyrs living in the 9th century Muslim-ruled Al-Andalus.
Recent historical interpretation of the martyr movement reflect questions on its nature.
With the triumph of Constantine as sole Roman emperor in 313, the church of the martyrs now found itself an accepted and favored religion, soon to become the official religion of the state.
As the religion of the empire, its survival was tied to the fate of the Empire.
Ambrose of Milan, former Pretorian Prefect of northern Italy before being elected bishop of Milan, preserved the Christian presumption against the use of violence, unless it was needed to protect important social values.
When the Empress Justina sought to have the new basilica in Milan turned over to the Arians, Ambrose, supported by the faithful, occupied it himself in what Egan identifies as an example of non-violent resistance [REF].
Following Ambrose, Augustine thought that the Christian, in imitation of Jesus, should not use violence to defend himself, but however, had an obligation to aid a victim under attack [REF].
Augustine of Hippo agreed strongly with the conventional wisdom of his time, that Christians should be pacifists philosophically, but that they should use defense as a means of preserving peace in the long run.
Augustine drew on Roman tradition to view a "just war" as one prosecuted under lawful authority for a just cause, i.e., repelling aggression or injury, retaking something wrongly seized, or to punish wrongdoing.
Augustine drew no distinction between offensive and defensive wars, since remedying injuries was a just cause apart from defence [REF].
During Augustine's last days Vandals invaded North Africa.
It is no coincidence that the appearance of the first monks comes within a few years of Constantine's assumption of power and the alliance of church and empire that he forged.
Monasticism was, in a sense, a continuation of martyrdom, reaffirming the contradiction between the Church and the world, by fleeing from the corruption of civilization in order to seek a greater treasure [REF].
Christian monasticism started in Egypt, then spread to Palestine, Syria, Mesopotamia, and finally to Italy and southern Gaul.
The penitentials, written by Irish monks, were a series of manuals designed for priests who heard confessions that specified certain penances for certain categories of sins.
These manuals proved to be such a concise and effective method for conceptualizing and standardizing notions of sin and repentance that they spread from Ireland to the Continent in a wide variety of collections that became enshrined in official collections of church law by the twelfth century.
The texts assign penances for killing in wartime, even under the lawful command of legitimate authority [REF].
The Carolingian period saw the emergence of both a renewed Roman Empire of the West and the beginning of fresh barbarian invasions from the north and east and the rise of Islam.
The close identification of the Carolingian Empire with the extent of Western Christianity revived the late Roman associations of Christianitas (Christendom) with the orbis Romanus or oikoumene (the Roman world).
Christian peace involved the monastic or ascetic peace of a pure heart and life devoted to prayer; the episcopal peace, or pax ecclesiae, of a properly functioning free and unified church; and the social or imperial peace of the world [REF].
Carolingian theory established two, separate, ecclesiastical and secular spheres of authority within Christian society, one to lead the body and one the spirit.
The Cáin Adomnáin (Law of Adomnán), also known as the Lex Innocentium (Law of Innocents) was promulgated amongst a gathering of Irish, Dál Riatan and Pictish notables at the Synod of Birr in 697.
This set of laws were designed, among other things, to guarantee the safety and immunity of various types of non-combatants in warfare [REF].
The indigenous Brehon Laws were committed to parchment about the 7th century, most likely by clerics.
Adomnán's initiative appears to be one of the first systematic attempts to lessen the savagery of warfare among Christians.
As Carolingian authority began to erode, especially on the outskirts of power, as in southern Gaul, the episcopate took steps to protect their congregations and their holdings against the encroachments of local nobles.
A limited Pax Dei was decreed at the Synod of Charroux in 989 and spread to most of Western Europe over the next century,[REF] surviving in some form until at least the thirteenth century.
A great crowd of many people (populus) gathered from the Poitou, the Limousin, and neighboring regions.
The Peace of God or Pax Dei was a proclamation issued by local clergy that decreed immunity from armed violence to noncombatants who could not defend themselves, beginning with the peasants (agricolae) and the clergy.
The Pax Dei prohibited nobles from invading churches, beating the defenseless, and burning houses.
After a lull in the first two decades of the eleventh century, the movement spread to the north with the support of king Robert, the Capetian.
The Truce of God or Treuga Dei had its origin in Normandy in the city of Caen [REF].
While the Truce of God was a temporary suspension of hostilities, as distinct from the Peace of God which was permanent, the jurisdiction of the Truce of God was broader.
It confirmed permanent peace for all churches and their grounds, the monks, clerks and chattels; all women, pilgrims, merchants and their servants, cattle and horses; and men at work in the fields.
The Truce soon spread from France to Italy and Germany; the oecumenical council of 1179 extended the institution to the whole Church by Canon xxi, "De treugis servandis", which was inserted in the collection of canon law, Decretal of Gregory IX, I, tit., "De treuga et pace" [REF].
Just war must be waged by a properly instituted authority such as the state.
Peace must be a central motive even in the midst of violence [REF].
Religious thinkers and secular writers attempted to incorporate the controls of the Peace and Truce of God into the existing warrior ethic by "Christianizing" it into the Crusades and the cult of chivalry.
Louis IX of France is equally famous for his failed crusades and for the settlement of disputes and the maintenance of peace within Christian lands.
Christian missionary work was presented as a viable alternative to the violence of the crusaders.
The history of peacemaking in the Catholic tradition reflects the religious meanings of peace, tied to positive virtues, such as love, and to the personal and social works of justice.
For the earliest Romans, "pax" meant to live in a state of agreement, where discord and war were absent.
Shalom () is the word for peace in the Hebrew Bible (Tanakh or ), and has other meanings also pertaining to well being, including use as a greeting.
The Greek meaning for peace, contained in the word eirene, evolved over the course of Greco-Roman civilization from such agricultural meanings as prosperity, fertility, and security of home contained in Hesiod's Works and Days, to more internal meanings of peace formulated by the Stoics, such as Epictetus.
Eirene is the word that the New Testament generally uses for peace, one of the twenty words used by the Septuagint, the Greek version of the Hebrew Bible used in the largely Greek-speaking Jewish communities throughout the Greco-Roman world.
The institutional church, and especially the papacy, long sought to use its authority to promote peace and justice, and like all human institutions, has met with mixed results.
For Medieval Europe, canon law served as a code of international law [REF].
In the thirteenth century the Papacy became the first Western power to make a systematic use of diplomacy [REF].
The papacy's association of peace with justice that motivated its active arbitration in international relations also prompted its interest in another area associated with justice, that of jus or law.
Pope Nicholas I (858-67) against the backdrop of Carolingian conquest Nicholas penned what is both a "classic summary of Christian faith and discipline" and a harsh condemnation of war.
During the tenure of Pope Pius IX, Catholics and Protestants collaborated to found a school in Rome to study international law and train international mediators committed to conflict resolution [REF].
In 1885 Pope Leo XIII was asked by Spain and Germany to mediate their territorial dispute in the South Pacific.
Pope Benedict XV left a legacy of lasting significance for the papacy and the church in the area of teaching and practice on war and peace.
Pope John XXIII made Vatican diplomatic resources available in 1962 to the United States and Russia, during the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Pope John Paul II launched the interreligious prayer for peace gatherings in Assisi in 1986 [REF].
On June 8, 2014 Pope Francis welcoming the Israeli and Palestinian presidents to the Vatican for an evening of peace prayers just weeks after the last round of U.S.-sponsored negotiations collapsed [REF].
Pope John XXIII (1958-63) set off a revolution in Roman Catholic thought and life that harkened back to an earlier period for its models and inspiration and brought the church into a new age.
In the 1980s the Polish Solidarity movement grew out of labor strikes in the shipyard at Gdańsk.
British historian Timothy Garton Ash, observed shortly after Pope John Paul II's death, " ..without the Polish Pope, no Solidarity revolution in Poland in 1980; without Solidarity, no dramatic change in Soviet policy towards eastern Europe under Gorbachev; without that change, no velvet revolutions in 1989 [REF].
Under the guidance of Archbishop Hélder Câmara, the Catholic church in Brazil became an outspoken critic of the 1964-85 military dictatorship and a powerful movement for social change [REF].
Léonie Duquet and Alice Domon were French religious sisters abducted in December 1977 by an Argentine death squad for their support of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo in their efforts to learn the fate of those disappeared by the then ruling military regime.
In El Salvador, Father Rutilio Grande spoke against the injustices at the hands of an oppressive government, and dedicated his life's work to organizing the impoverished, marginalized rural farmers of El Salvador as they demanded respect for their rights.
Denis Hurley O.M.I. was the South African Roman Catholic Archbishop of Durban.
Jaime Sin was the Cardinal Archbishop of Manila, who "played a key role in the Philippines' transition to democracy following the lengthy dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos [REF].
During World War I, Ben Salmon was a conscientious objector and outspoken critic of Just War theology.
During world War II, Out of a total of 21 million Catholics only 223 claimed IV-E CO status, conscientious objection to military service; 135 were eventually classified.
Initially founded as the War Relief Services, the original purpose of Catholic Relief Services was to aid the refugees of war-torn Europe.
After the war Catholic peacemaking narrowed down to a very few institutions, including the Catholic Worker Movement,[REF] and individuals, including Dorothy Day, Ammon Hennacy, and Thomas Merton.
Erasmus laid a foundation for religious toleration.
Francisco de Vitoria was a Spanish Dominican philosopher, considered one of the founders of early international law.
Dominican friar Pedro de Córdoba OP (c.1460-1525) was a Spanish missionary on the island of Hispaniola.
Other important figures include Bartolomé de Las Casas and Peter of Saint Joseph Betancur .
Émeric Crucé was a French monk who took the position that wars were the result of international misunderstandings and the domination of society by the warrior class, both of which could be reduced through commerce, as that brought people together [REF].
From 1871 to 1878, Chancellor Bismarck, who controlled both the German Empire and the Kingdom of Prussia, launched the "Kulturkampf" in Prussia to reduce the power of the Catholic Church in public affairs, and keep Polish Catholics under control.
The first Caritas organisation was established by Lorenz Worthmann 9 November 1897 in Germany [REF].
In an effort to overcome many prejudices and fears between different nationalities, ethnic and religious groups.
Bishop Konrad von Preysing was one of the most firm and consistent of senior Catholics to oppose the Nazis.
Austrian Bishop Gfoellner of Linz had the encyclical read from the pulpits of his diocese.
Belgian Cardinal Jozef-Ernest van Roey was deeply opposed to Nazi Germany, and once said, "With Germany we step many degrees downward and reach the lowest possible depths.
Pallottine priest Franz Reinisch was beheaded SAC for refusing to take the oath of allegiance to Hitler.
The Gospels present the birth of Jesus as ushering in a new age of peace.
The Sermon on the Mount (Mt.
The account of the healing of the centurion's servant suggests to John Eppstein that Jesus did not view military service as sinful, since rather than reprove the soldier for his profession, Jesus praised him for his faith.
The 2-door hardtop coupe was discontinued and replaced with the luxury sports coupe Nissan Leopard.
Trim levels were expanded, and were designated the Brougham, SGL Extra, SGL, GL and the Jack Nicklaus edition which was very similar to the Brougham, which offered the turbo.
February 1980 saw the LD28 6-cylinder offered with a 5-speed manual transmission installed with a floor-mounted shifter, but leaving the column shift for the 4-speed manual transmission.
In April 1981 both models get redesignation of the front grille, headlamp cluster, tail lamp, and "C Pillar" trim.
Introduced in 1987, the Y31 sedan (with revised body appearance) still in production currently.
The four-speed automatic transmission is now computer controlled for smoother shifts.
The Gloria competed for buyers with related Nissan vehicles that shared platforms used for the Gloria, specifically, the Nissan Cima, Nissan Leopard and the Nissan Cedric, as well as other sport-oriented vehicles, such as the Nissan Cefiro, Nissan Skyline and Nissan Laurel.
The Gloria Y31 can be distinguished from its sibling, the Cedric Y31 by the taillights at the back.
June 1987 saw a special-edition Gloria built for parade usage.
The 4-speed automatic transmission is now computer controlled for smoother shifts.
June 1999 saw the release of the final version of the Gloria, with design assistance from Porsche.
January 2000 saw Autech release a 40th anniversary edition of the Gloria.
Production of the Gloria ended after 46 years of production, and was replaced by the Nissan Fuga on October 2004.
April 1967 saw a restyle of the bodywork, and all Prince vehicles were now known as Nissan (but the A30 Gloria was officially registered as "Prince" to the Government).
The original model was the PA30 sedan and VPA30 wagon, originally fitted with Prince's own G7 six-cylinder engine.
The appearance of the A30 Gloria is very similar to the Nissan Prince Royal, built exclusively for the Emperor of Japan.
This generation of Prince was also assembled in New Zealand by Steel Brothers in Christchurch but was now badged as a Nissan Gloria though it was still imported by Croyden Motors, a separate company to Datsun importer Nissan-Datsun NZ Ltd.
The Prince Automobile Manufacturers, previously known as Fuji Precision Industry, released a modification of their Prince Skyline with a more luxurious approach, and modified exterior sheet metal, at the All Japan Automobile Show, after the Tokyo Motor Show and the Skyline 1900 exhibition, in October 1958.
In April 1959, Crown Prince Akihito was presented with the first Gloria as a wedding gift.
In February 1960 the BLSIP-2 was released.
In February 1961 the BLSIP-3 was released.
The suspension used double wishbone and coil springs in the front, and De Dion setup in the back.
Later in 1962, Prince introduced the second generation, "S40" Gloria.
A prototype of the second generation Gloria had many design similarities to the Chevrolet Corvair, and Hino Contessa, but the production version was completely redesigned.
On October 1962 at the 9th All-Japan Auto show, the 2.5 L G-11 engine was presented, although it was not immediately installed in any car.
The second Japan Grand Prix saw the G7B-R Gloria Super 6 engine win the T-VI class race, albeit installed in a lighter Skyline.
In 1966 the S41-2 series was introduced.
The Gloria was the first Prince to be assembled outside Japan when New Zealand importer Croyden Motors contracted Steel Brothers Addington to assemble an initial 300 units from CKD kits at a new 1,000-unit factory specially built for the job.
Starting with this generation on February 1971, the Cedric and Gloria were essentially the same vehicle, with the Gloria being more upscale than the Cedric.
October 1971 saw the 2.5 litre L26 six-cylinder engine added to the options list.
On August 1972, both a two-door hardtop coupé "personal luxury car" and a four-door hardtop was added, to compete with the Toyota Crown coupé.
June 4, 1983 saw a major restyle of the previous generation for all versions of the Gloria.
The straight-six engine, which had been used for many years, was upgraded to an all new V6-design, called the VG series engine which made its debut in the Cedric/Gloria.
Trim levels offered were the Brougham, SGL, Grand Edition, GL Grand Edition, GL and the Standard.
June 1985 saw mild exterior changes, with the biggest mechanical change being a variable nozzle for the VG20ET turbocharged engine.
Export versions usually received the diesel sixes or the three-liter six-cylinder engines, although there was also a version with the four-cylinder 2.3 litre SD23-engine, producing (SAE net) [REF].
This generation of the Gloria has been completely shared with the Cedric, essentially being the same vehicle, aside from changes in appearance.
October 1975 saw the introduction of the 2000GL-E and the 2000SGL-E, with the "E" designation signifying fuel injection, which was included in the Nissan NAPS emission control technology package. .
June 1976 saw cosmetic changes, with halogen headlights being used on all versions except the sedan used for taxi service.
June 1977 saw the introduction of the 2800 E Brougham at the top of the options list.
November 1978 saw another emissions adjustment.
This generation was introduced June 1991, and was offered as a sedan; a center "B" pillar was added to improve vehicle solidity, and improve crash worthiness, but is obscured behind side window glass and frameless side windows.
Trim levels offered were the Gran Turismo SV, Grand Turismo, and the top level vehicle is called the Gran Turismo ULTIMA.
Popularity of the Nissan Cima is beginning to affect sales of the Gloria, as sales are not as high as in past generations.
The second president of the Republic of Texas, Mirabeau B. Lamar, is the Father of Texas Education.
Between 2006 and 2007, Texas spent $7,275 per pupil ranking it below the national average of $9,389.
Students in Texas take the State of Texas Assessments of Academic Readiness (STAAR) in primary and secondary school.
Although unusual in the West, school corporal punishment is not uncommon in more conservative areas of the state, with 28,569 public school students[REF] paddled at least one time, according to government data for the 2011-2012 school year [REF].
The state's two most widely recognized flagship universities are The University of Texas at Austin and Texas A&M University, ranked as the 52nd[REF] and 69th[REF] best universities in the nation according to the 2014 edition of U.S. News & World Report's "Best Colleges", respectively.
Texas's controversial alternative affirmative action plan, Texas House Bill 588, guarantees Texas students who graduated in the percent of their high school class automatic admission to state-funded universities.
Thirty-six (36) separate and distinct public universities exist in Texas, of which 32 belong to one of the six state university systems [REF].
The state is home to various private institutions of higher learning-ranging from liberal arts colleges to a nationally recognized top-tier research university.
Texans have historically had difficulties traversing Texas due to the state's large size and rough terrain.
Located centrally in North America, the state is an important transportation hub.
The first Texas freeway was the Gulf Freeway opened in 1948 in Houston [REF].
Texas has 730 airports, second most of any state in the nation.
Texas's second-largest air facility is Houston's George Bush Intercontinental Airport (IAH).
Around 1,150 seaports dot Texas's coast with over 1000mi of channels [REF].
Part of the state's tradition of cowboys is derived from the massive cattle drives which its ranchers organized in the nineteenth century to drive livestock to railroads and markets in Kansas, for shipment to the East.
The first railroad to operate in Texas was the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos and Colorado Railway, opening in August 1853 [REF].
Since 1911, Texas has led the nation in length of railroad miles within the state.
Both Dallas and Houston feature light rail systems.
Amtrak provides Texas with limited intercity passenger rail service.
The current Texas Constitution was adopted in 1876.
Texas has a plural executive branch system limiting the power of the governor, which is a weak executive compared to some other states.
The bicameral Texas Legislature consists of the House of Representatives, with 150 members, and a Senate, with 31 members.
The judiciary of Texas is one of the most complex in the United States, with many layers and overlapping jurisdictions.
The Texas Ranger Division of the Texas Department of Public Safety is a law enforcement agency with statewide jurisdiction.
The Texas constitution defines the responsibilities of county governments, which serve as agents of the state.
In the 1870s, white Democrats wrested power back in the state legislature from the biracial coalition at the end of Reconstruction.
Although Texas was essentially a one-party state during this time and the Democratic primary was viewed as "the real election," the Democratic Party had conservative and liberal factions, which became more pronounced after the New Deal [REF].
The state's conservative white voters began to support Republican presidential candidates by the mid-20th century.
The 2003 Texas redistricting of Congressional districts led by Republican Tom DeLay, was called by the New York Times "an extreme case of partisan gerrymandering" [REF].
In the 2014 Texas elections, the Tea Party movement made large gains, with numerous Tea Party favorites being elected into office, including Dan Patrick as lieutenant governor,[REF][REF] Ken Paxton as attorney general,[REF][REF] in addition to numerous other candidates[REF] including conservative Republican Greg Abbott as governor [REF].
Texas voters lean toward fiscal conservatism, while enjoying the benefits of huge federal investment in the state in military and other facilities achieved by the power of the Solid South in the 20th century.
Since 1980, most Texas voters have supported Republican presidential candidates.
Residents of counties along the Rio Grande closer to the Mexico-United States border, where there are many Latino residents, generally vote for Democratic Party candidates, while most other rural and suburban areas of Texas have shifted to voting for Republican Party candidates [REF].
As of the general elections of 2014, a large majority of the members of Texas's U.S. House delegation are Republican, along with both U.S. Senators.
Texas has 254 counties- the most nationwide.
Although Texas permits cities and counties to enter "interlocal agreements" to share services, the state does not allow consolidated city-county governments, nor does it have metropolitan governments.
Texas also permits the creation of "special districts", which provide limited services.
Municipal, school district, and special district elections are nonpartisan,[REF] though the party affiliation of a candidate may be well-known.
Texas has a reputation of very harsh criminal punishment for criminal offenses.
The large size of Texas and its location at the intersection of multiple climate zones gives the state highly variable weather.
Snow falls multiple times each winter in the Panhandle and mountainous areas of West Texas, once or twice a year in North Texas, and once every few years in Central and East Texas.
Maximum temperatures in the summer months average from the 80s °F (26 °C) in the mountains of West Texas and on Galveston Island to around in the Rio Grande Valley, but most areas of Texas see consistent summer high temperatures in the range.
Night-time summer temperatures range from the upper 50s °F (14 °C) in the West Texas mountains[REF] to in Galveston [REF].
The table below consists of averages for August (generally the warmest month) and January (generally the coldest) in selected cities in various regions of the state.
Thunderstorms strike Texas often, especially the eastern and northern portions of the state.
Some of the most destructive hurricanes in U.S. history have impacted Texas.
Other devastating Texas hurricanes include the 1915 Galveston hurricane, Hurricane Audrey in 1957 which killed over 600 people, Hurricane Carla in 1961, Hurricane Beulah in 1967, Hurricane Alicia in 1983, Hurricane Rita in 2005, and Hurricane Ike in 2008 [REF].
Texas emits the most greenhouse gases in the U.S [REF].
As of 2014, Texas had a gross state product (GSP) of $1.648 trillion, the second highest in the U.S [REF].
Texas's large population, abundance of natural resources, thriving cities and leading centers of higher education have contributed to a large and diverse economy.
As of April 2013, the state's unemployment rate is 6.4 percent [REF].
In 2010, Site Selection Magazine ranked Texas as the most business-friendly state in the nation, in part because of the state's three-billion-dollar Texas Enterprise Fund [REF].
In 2010, there were 346,000 millionaires in Texas, constituting the second-largest population of millionaires in the nation [REF].
Texas has a "low taxes, low services" reputation [REF].
Instead, the state collects revenue from property taxes (though these are collected at the county, city, and school district level; Texas has a state constitutional prohibition against a state property tax) and sales taxes.
Texas is a "tax donor state"; in 2005, for every dollar Texans paid to the federal government in federal income taxes, the state got back about $0.94 in benefits [REF].
Texas has the most farms and the highest acreage in the United States.
Texas leads the nation in the production of cattle, horses, sheep, goats, wool, mohair and hay [REF].
Texas throughout the 21st century has been hammered by drought.
Ever since the discovery of oil at Spindletop, energy has been a dominant force politically and economically within the state [REF].
The Railroad Commission of Texas, contrary to its name, regulates the state's oil and gas industry, gas utilities, pipeline safety, safety in the liquefied petroleum gas industry, and surface coal and uranium mining.
Texas has known petroleum deposits of about 5Goilbbl, which makes up about one-fourth of the known U.S. reserves [REF].
According to the Energy Information Administration, Texans consume, on average, the fifth most energy (of all types) in the nation per capita and as a whole, following behind Wyoming, Alaska, Louisiana, North Dakota, and Iowa [REF].
Unlike the rest of the nation, most of Texas is on its own alternating current power grid, the Texas Interconnection.
The state is a leader in renewable energy commercialization
With large universities systems coupled with initiatives like the Texas Enterprise Fund and the Texas Emerging Technology Fund, a wide array of different high tech industries have developed in Texas.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center (NASA JSC) located in Southeast Houston, sits as the crown jewel of Texas's aeronautics industry.
Texas's affluence stimulates a strong commercial sector consisting of retail, wholesale, banking and insurance, and construction industries.
Mexico, the state's largest trading partner, imports a third of the state's exports because of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Texas is the second largest U.S. state, behind Alaska, with an area of 268820sqmi.
Texas is in the south central part of the United States of America.
With 10 climatic regions, 14 soil regions and 11 distinct ecological regions, regional classification becomes problematic with differences in soils, topography, geology, rainfall, and plant and animal communities [REF].
The Gulf Coastal Plains region wraps around the Gulf of Mexico on the southeast section of the state.
The Great Plains region in central Texas is located in spans through the state's panhandle and Llano Estacado to the state's hill country near Austin.
Texas has 3,700 named streams and 15 major rivers,[REF][REF] with the Rio Grande as the largest.
The size and unique history of Texas make its regional affiliation debatable; it can be fairly considered a Southern or a Southwestern state, or both.
Texas is the southernmost part of the Great Plains, which ends in the south against the folded Sierra Madre Occidental of Mexico.
This margin existed until Laurasia and Gondwana collided in the Pennsylvanian subperiod to form Pangea.
The late Paleozoic mountains collapsed as rifting in the Jurassic period began to open the Gulf of Mexico.
East Texas outcrops consist of Cretaceous and Paleogene sediments which contain important deposits of Eocene lignite.
A wide range of animals and insects live in Texas.
Texas plays host to several species of wasps.
During the spring Texas wildflowers such as the state flower, the bluebonnet, line highways throughout Texas.
No culture was dominant in the present-day Texas region, and many peoples inhabited the area [REF].
Whether a Native American tribe was friendly or warlike was critical to the fates of European explorers and settlers in that land [REF].
The first historical document related to Texas was a map of the Gulf Coast, created in 1519 by Spanish explorer Alonso Álvarez de Pineda [REF].
Francisco Vázquez de Coronado describes his 1541 encounter with "Two kinds of people travel around these plains with the cows; one is called Querechos and the others Teyas; they are very well built, and painted, and are enemies of each other.
European powers ignored the area until accidentally settling there in 1685.
In 1690 Spanish authorities, concerned that France posed competitive threat, constructed several missions in East Texas [REF].
Hostile native tribes and distance from nearby Spanish colonies discouraged settlers from moving to the area.
When the United States purchased Louisiana from France in 1803, American authorities insisted that the agreement also included Texas.
Hoping that more settlers would reduce the near-constant Comanche raids, Mexican Texas liberalized its immigration policies to permit immigrants from outside Mexico and Spain [REF].
Austin's settlers, the Old Three Hundred, made places along the Brazos River in 1822 [REF].
Many immigrants openly flouted Mexican law, especially the prohibition against slavery.
The Anahuac Disturbances in 1832 were the first open revolt against Mexican rule and they coincided with a revolt in Mexico against the nation's president [REF].
Within Mexico, tensions continued between federalists and centralists.
During this time of political turmoil, Mexican President Antonio López de Santa Anna personally led an army to end the revolt [REF].
The newly elected Texian delegates to the Convention of 1836 quickly signed a Declaration of Independence on March 2, forming the Republic of Texas.
While Texas had won its independence, political battles raged between two factions of the new Republic.
Mexico launched two small expeditions into Texas in 1842.
As early as 1837, the Republic made several attempts to negotiate annexation with the United States [REF].
After Texas's annexation, Mexico broke diplomatic relations with the United States.
After a series of United States victories, the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ended the two-year war.
The Compromise of 1850 set Texas's boundaries at their present form.
They also brought or purchased enslaved African Americans, whose numbers tripled in the state from 1850 to 1860, from 58,000 to 182,566 [REF].
Texas was at war again after the election of 1860.
Not all Texans favored secession initially, although many of the same would later support the Southern cause.
While far from the major battlefields of the American Civil War, Texas contributed large numbers of men and equipment to the rest of the Confederacy [REF].
Texas descended into anarchy for two months between the surrender of the Army of Northern Virginia and the assumption of authority by Union General Gordon Granger.
In 1900, Texas suffered the deadliest natural disaster in U.S. history during the Galveston hurricane [REF].
In 1901, the Democratic-dominated state legislature passed a bill requiring payment of a poll tax for voting, which effectively disenfranchised most blacks, and many poor whites and Latinos.
The Great Depression and the Dust Bowl dealt a double blow to the state's economy, which had significantly improved since the Civil War.
Texas modernized and expanded its system of higher education through the 1960s.
On November 22, 1963, President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas [REF].
Beginning around the mid-20th century, Texas began to transform from a rural and agricultural state to one that was urban and industrialized [REF].
During the late 20th century, the Republican Party replaced the Democratic Party as the dominant party in the state, as the latter became more politically liberal and as demographic changes favored the former [REF].
Historically, Texas culture comes from a blend of Southern (Dixie), Western (frontier), and Southwestern (Mexican/Anglo fusion) influences, varying in degrees of such from one intrastate region to another.
Texas has made a strong mark on national and international pop culture.
The internationally known slogan "Don't Mess with Texas" began as an anti-littering advertisement.
Founded in 1892, Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth, also called "The Modern", is Texas's oldest art museum.
The Deep Ellum district within Dallas became popular during the 1920s and 1930s as the prime jazz and blues hotspot in the Southern United States.
Austin, The Live Music Capital of the World, boasts "more live music venues per capita than such music hotbeds as Nashville, Memphis, Los Angeles, Las Vegas or New York City."[REF]
Since 1980, San Antonio has evolved into "The Tejano Music Capital Of The World."[REF]
Notwithstanding the concentration of elite medical centers located in the state, The Commonwealth Fund ranks the Texas healthcare system the third worst in the nation [REF].
The Trust for America's Health ranked Texas 15th highest in adult obesity, with 27.2 percent of the state's population measured as obese [REF].
Texas has highest maternal mortality rate in the developed world, and the rate by which Texas women died from pregnancy related complications doubled from 2010 to 2014, to 23.8 per 100,000.
Many elite research medical centers are located in Texas.
The Texas Medical Center in Houston, holds the world's largest concentration of research and healthcare institutions, with 47 member institutions [REF].
San Antonio's South Texas Medical Center facilities rank sixth in clinical medicine research impact in the United States [REF].
Both the American Heart Association and the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center call Dallas home.
While American football has long been considered "king" in the state, Texans today enjoy a wide variety of sports [REF].
Texans can cheer for a plethora of professional sports teams.
Collegiate athletics have deep significance in Texas culture, especially football.
According to a survey of Division I-A coaches the rivalry between the University of Oklahoma and the University of Texas at Austin, the Red River Shootout, ranks the third best in the nation [REF].
The University Interscholastic League (UIL) organizes most primary and secondary school competitions.
Texans also enjoy the rodeo.
Texas Motor Speedway hosts annual NASCAR Cup Series and IndyCar Series auto races since 1997.
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Texas was 27,469,114 on July 1, 2015, a 9.24 percent increase since the 2010 United States Census [REF].
As of 2004, the state had 3.5 million foreign-born residents (15.6 percent of the state population), of which an estimated 1.2 million are illegal.
Texas' Rio Grande Valley is ground zero for illegal immigration across the Southwest border.
Texas's population density is 34.8 persons/km2 which is slightly higher than the average population density of the U.S. as a whole, at 31 persons/km2.
Two-thirds of all Texans live in a major metropolitan area such as Houston.
As of 2011, 69.8% of the population of Texas younger than age 1 were minorities (meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic white) [REF].
German, Irish, and English Americans are the three largest European ancestry groups in Texas.
African Americans are the largest racial minority in Texas.
Native Americans are a smaller minority in the state.
Asian Americans are a sizable minority group in Texas.
Americans with origins from the Pacific are the smallest minority in Texas.
Multiracial individuals are also a visible minority in Texas.
Hispanics and Latinos are the second largest group in Texas after non-Hispanic European Americans.
German descendants inhabit much of central and southeast-central Texas.
In 2010, 49 percent of all births were Hispanics; 35 percent were non-Hispanic whites; 11.5 percent were non-Hispanic blacks, and 4.3 percent were Asians/Pacific Islanders [REF].
Three interstate highways-I-35 to the west (Dallas-Fort Worth to San Antonio, with Austin in between), I-45 to the east (Dallas to Houston), and I-10 to the south (San Antonio to Houston) define the Texas Urban Triangle region.
In contrast to the cities, unincorporated rural settlements known as colonias often lack basic infrastructure and are marked by poverty [REF].
The most common accent and/or dialect spoken by natives throughout Texas is sometimes referred to as Texan English, which itself is a sub-variety of a broader category of American English known as Southern American English [REF].
As of 2010, 65.8% (14,740,304) of Texas residents age 5 and older spoke only English at home, while 29.2% (6,543,702) spoke Spanish, 0.75 percent (168,886) Vietnamese, and Chinese (which includes Cantonese and Mandarin) was spoken by 0.56% (122,921) of the population over the age of five [REF].
Other languages spoken include German (including Texas German) by 0.33% (73,137,) Tagalog with 0.29% (73,137) speakers, and French (including Cajun French) was spoken by 0.25% (55,773) of Texans [REF].
In total, 34.2% (7,660,406) of Texas's population aged five and older spoke a language at home other than English [REF].
Known as the buckle of the Bible Belt, East Texas is socially conservative [REF].
Adherents of many other religions reside predominantly in the urban centers of Texas.
As well as being active in defending the independence of teachers, and opposing a communist takeover of the New York Teachers' Union, Dewey was involved in the organization that eventually became the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP).
He was an avid supporter of Henry George's proposal for taxing land values.
He directed the famous Dewey Commission held in Mexico in 1937, which cleared Leon Trotsky of the charges made against him by Joseph Stalin,[REF] and marched for women's rights, among many other causes.
In 1939, John Dewey was elected President of the League for Industrial Democracy, an organization with the goal of educating college students about the labor movement.
In 1950, Dewey, Bertrand Russell, Benedetto Croce, Karl Jaspers, and Jacques Maritain agreed to act as honorary chairmen of the Congress for Cultural Freedom,[REF] a false-front anti-communist advocacy group founded that year and funded by the CIA.
Besides publishing prolifically himself, Dewey also sat on the boards of scientific publications such as Sociometry (advisory board, 1942) and Journal of Social Psychology (editorial board, 1942), as well as having posts at other publications such as New Leader (contributing editor, 1949).
The following publications by John Dewey are referenced or mentioned in this article.
To those who aspire to the profession of teaching (APT).
The duties and responsibilities of the teaching profession (DRT).
The educational balance, efficiency and thinking (EET).
Professional spirit among teachers (PST).
The teacher and the public (TAP).
John Dewey High School in Brooklyn, New York is named after him.
John Dewey Academy of Learning in Green Bay, Wisconsin is a charter school named after him.
The John Dewey Academy in Great Barrington, MA is a college preparatory therapeutic boarding school for troubled adolescents.
John Dewey Elementrary School in Warrensville Hts., Ohio, an Eastern Suburb of Cleveland, Ohio, is named after him.
John Dewey Elementary School in Flint, Michigan was named after him but the school is now a career training center - the Sylvester Broom Center.
John Dewey Middle School in Adams County in Denver, Colorado is a junior high school named after him.
Dewey founded the University of Chicago laboratory school, supported educational organizations, and supported settlement houses especially Jane Addams' Hull House [REF].
Through his work at the Hull House serving on its first board of trustees, Dewey was not only an activist for the cause but also a partner working to serve the large immigrant community of Chicago and women's suffrage.
Addams is unquestionably a maker of democratic community and pragmatic education
Dewey believed that a woman's place in society was determined by her environment and not just her biology.
As commonly argued by Dewey's greatest critics, he was not able to come up with strategies in order to fulfill his ideas that would lead to a successful democracy, educational system, and a successful women's suffrage movement.
Persons do not become a society by living in physical proximity any more than a man ceases to be socially influenced by being so many feet or miles removed from others.
His work on democracy influenced one of his students, B. R. Ambedkar, who later went on to become one of the founding fathers of independent India [REF].
Dewey sometimes referred to his philosophy as instrumentalism rather than pragmatism, and would have recognized the similarity of these two schools to the newer school named consequentialism.
But in the proper interpretation of "pragmatic," namely the function of consequences as necessary tests of the validity of propositions, provided these consequences are operationally instituted and are such as to resolve the specific problem evoking the operations, the text that follows is thoroughly pragmatic [REF].
His concern for precise definition led him to detailed analysis of careless word usage, reported in Knowing and the Known in 1949.
The terminology problem in the fields of epistemology and logic is partially due, according to Dewey and Bentley,[REF] to inefficient and imprecise use of words and concepts that reflect three historic levels of organization and presentation [REF].
A series of characterizations of Transactions indicate the wide range of considerations involved [REF].
Since the mid-1980s, Deweyan ideas have experienced revival as a major source of inspiration for the public journalism movement.
Dewey gives a concrete definition to the formation of a public.
In The Public and its Problems, Dewey presents a rebuttal to Walter Lippmann's treatise on the role of journalism in democracy.
Dewey refutes this model by assuming that politics is the work and duty of each individual in the course of his daily routine.
Dewey also said that journalism should conform to this ideal by changing its emphasis from actions or happenings (choosing a winner of a given situation) to alternatives, choices, consequences, and conditions,[REF] in order to foster conversation and improve the generation of knowledge.
Dewey believed that communication creates a great community, and citizens who participate actively with public life contribute to that community.
Dewey's educational theories were presented in My Pedagogic Creed (1897), The School and Society (1900), The Child and the Curriculum (1902), Democracy and Education (1916) and Experience and Education (1938).
The ideas of democracy and social reform are continually discussed in Dewey's writings on education.
In addition to his ideas regarding what education is and what effect it should have on society, Dewey also had specific notions regarding how education should take place within the classroom.
At the same time, Dewey was alarmed by many of the "child-centered" excesses of educational-school pedagogues who claimed to be his followers, and he argued that too much reliance on the child could be equally detrimental to the learning process.
In order to rectify this dilemma, Dewey advocated for an educational structure that strikes a balance between delivering knowledge while also taking into account the interests and experiences of the student.
Dewey not only re-imagined the way that the learning process should take place, but also the role that the teacher should play within that process.
For Dewey and his philosophical followers, education stifles individual autonomy when learners are taught that knowledge is transmitted in one direction, from the expert to the learner.
For many, education's purpose is to train students for work by providing the student with a limited set of skills and information to do a particular job.
According to Dewey, the emphasis is placed on producing these attributes in children for use in their contemporary life because it is "impossible to foretell definitely just what civilization will be twenty years from now" (Dewey, MPC, 2010, p. 25).
Dewey believed that the successful classroom teacher possesses a passion for knowledge and an intellectual curiosity in the materials and methods they teach.
According to Dewey, this propensity and passion for intellectual growth in the profession must be accompanied by a natural desire to communicate one's knowledge with others.
The best indicator of teacher quality, according to Dewey, is the ability to watch and respond to the movement of the mind with keen awareness of the signs and quality of the responses her students exhibit with regard to the subject-matter presented (Dewey, APT, 2010; Dewey, 1904).
According to Dewey, the successful classroom teacher occupies an indispensable passion for promoting the intellectual growth of young children.
It is essential, according to Dewey, that the classroom teacher has the mental propensity to overcome the demands and stressors placed on her because the students can sense when their teacher is not genuinely invested in promoting their learning (Dewey, PST, 2010).
Dewey's passions for teaching-a natural love for working with young children, a natural propensity to inquire about the subjects, methods and other social issues related to the profession, and a desire to share this acquired knowledge with others-are not a set of outwardly displayed mechanical skills.
As Dewey notes, other professional fields, such as law and medicine cultivate a professional spirit in their fields to constantly study their work, their methods of their work, and a perpetual need for intellectual growth and concern for issues related to their profession.
In 1919, while traveling in Japan on sabbatical leave, Dewey was invited by Peking University to visit China, probably at the behest of his former students, Hu Shi and Chiang Monlin.
In these two years, Dewey gave nearly 200 lectures to Chinese audiences and wrote nearly monthly articles for Americans in The New Republic and other magazines.
Their letters from China and Japan describing their experiences to their family were published in 1920, edited by their daughter Evelyn [REF].
John Dewey was born in Burlington, Vermont, to a family of modest means [REF].
After two years as a high-school teacher in Oil City, Pennsylvania and one teaching elementary school in the small town of Charlotte, Vermont, Dewey decided that he was unsuited for employment in primary or secondary education.
In 1894 Dewey joined the newly founded University of Chicago (1894-1904) where he developed his belief in Rational Empiricism, becoming associated with the newly emerging Pragmatic philosophy.
Along with the historians Charles A. Beard and James Harvey Robinson, and the economist Thorstein Veblen, Dewey is one of the founders of The New School.
Reflecting his immense influence on 20th-century thought, Hilda Neatby, in 1953, wrote "Dewey has been to our age what Aristotle was to the later Middle Ages, not a philosopher, but the philosopher."[REF] .
Dewey was first married to Alice Chipman.
The United States Postal Service honored Dewey with a Prominent Americans series 30¢ postage stamp.
At the University of Michigan, Dewey published his first two books, Psychology (1887), and Leibniz's New Essays Concerning the Human Understanding (1888), both of which expressed Dewey's early commitment to British neo-Hegelianism.
By 1894, Dewey had joined Tufts, with whom he would later write Ethics (1908), at the recently founded University of Chicago and invited Mead and Angell to follow him, the four men forming the basis of the so-called "Chicago group" of psychology.
Their new style of psychology, later dubbed functional psychology, had a practical emphasis on action and application.
Dewey was elected president of the American Psychological Association in 1899.
Dewey also expressed interest in work in the psychology of visual perception performed by Dartmouth research professor Adelbert Ames, Jr.
Dewey's interests and writings included many topics, and according to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, "a substantial part of his published output consisted of commentary on current domestic and international politics, and public statements on behalf of many causes.
In 1917, Dewey met F. M. Alexander in New York City and later wrote introductions to Alexander's Man's Supreme Inheritance (1918), Constructive Conscious Control of the Individual (1923) and The Use of the Self (1932).
As well as his contacts with people mentioned elsewhere in the article, he also maintained correspondence with Henri Bergson, William M. Brown, Martin Buber, George S. Counts, William Rainey Harper, Sidney Hook, and George Santayana.
Dewey sees paradox in contemporary logical theory.
Logical positivism also figured in Dewey's thought.
Yet Dewey was not entirely opposed to modern logical trends.
Louis Menand argues in The Metaphysical Club that Jane Addams had been critical of Dewey's emphasis on antagonism in the context of a discussion of the Pullman strike of 1894.
the most magnificent exhibition of intellectual & moral faith I ever saw.
I can see that I have always been interpreting dialectic wrong end up, the unity as the reconciliation of opposites, instead of the opposites as the unity in its growth, and thus translated the physical tension into a moral thing..
Not only is actual antagonizing bad, but the assumption that there is or may be antagonism is bad-- in fact, the real first antagonism always comes back to the assumption.
Art as Experience (1934) is Dewey's major writing on aesthetics.
It is, in accordance with his place in the Pragmatist tradition that emphasizes community, a study of the individual art object as embedded in (and inextricable from) the experiences of a local culture.
Construction of the original Nauvoo Temple commenced April 6, 1841, and its final dedication was in May 1846.
At its base the building was long and wide, with a clock tower and weather vane reaching to -a 60% increase over the dimensions of the Kirtland Temple.
The location of the rooms is symbolic.
The basement of the Nauvoo Temple, used as the baptistery, contained a large baptismal font in the center of the main room.
The font, built of tongue and grooved white pine, was painted white.
A flight of eight broad steps led to a landing where two more steps entered three archways.
Two large double doors on the east wall opened to the first floor assembly hall of the lower court, known as the "Great Hall", which occupied the remainder of the floor space east of the vestibule.
At the east and west ends of the hall were two sets of similar pulpits.
The hall was fitted with enclosed pews with two aisles.
The two stairwells were constructed of dressed limestone walls.
The staircases, made of wood, provided access to all levels of the temple, with a landing at each floor.
The second floor hall was similar in construction to the Great Hall, except that it included the foyer area, the location of the vestibule.
The floor would have had a similar configuration as the Great Hall with a set of double pulpits and pews, but the interior was never completed.
At the top of the two stairways, opening to a foyer, was the attic floor.
Rising from the plateau of the attic is an octagonal tower.
In 1999 it was announced the temple would be rebuilt with the same exterior look of the original temple.
The reconstructed baptistery follows the original, with the addition of a metal lining to prevent deterioration and a platform where witnesses may sit.
The first temple built in Europe was the Bern Switzerland Temple (9).
The Los Angeles California Temple (10), the largest temple built by the church, was dedicated in 1956.
When the statue of Moroni was installed, it faced southeast (as does the temple), but was shortly turned to face due east at the request of church president David O. McKay.
In addition to the Celestial room, the temple has four ordinance rooms (Creation room, Garden room, World room, Terrestrial room), and ten sealing rooms.
Following the basic design of the Bern temple, the Hamilton New Zealand Temple (11) was dedicated in 1958.
The London England Temple (12), dedicated in 1958, follows the same basic pattern of the Bern and Hamilton temples.
The next temple to incorporate this style would be built in 1980.
Ten years later the church built four temples, similar in style, based on the single-spire design.
Lawsuits arguing that the Dover Amendment unfairly discriminates against non-religious groups[REF] delayed the addition of the spire of the Boston temple by several years as the courts decided whether the spire was a required element of the design of the temple.
Some recently constructed temples have returned to this earlier style, with two floors and a smaller building, with fewer ordinance and sealing rooms.
The Kirtland Temple, built in Kirtland, Ohio, was not designed as a church or cathedral.
Joseph received the word of the Lord for him to take his two counselors, Frederick G. Williams and Sidney Rigdon, and come before the Lord and He would show them the plan or model of the house to be built.
Angell continued as church architect, designing the Salt Lake Temple, the Lion House, the Beehive House, the Utah Territorial Statehouse, the St. George Utah Temple, and many other public buildings.
The sandstone used to build the temple was quarried from south of the Temple.
The pulpits and the pews are among the distinctive features of the interior.
The main floor of the Kirtland Temple was used for various services of worship, and the second floor was a school for the ministry.
The St. George Utah Temple (1), described as castellated Gothic style.
The temple was originally patterned after the Kirtland and Nauvoo Temples, with two large assembly halls featuring a set of pulpits at each end.
About a year after the original dedication, a lightning storm caused extensive damage to the original tower.
Following a second major renovation project in 1975, the progressive-style ordinance rooms were replaced with three motion-picture ordinance rooms.
The Logan Utah Temple (2) was the first temple to feature progressive-style ordinance rooms for presentation of the endowment ceremony.
In addition to these ordinance rooms, the temple has eleven sealing rooms with a total floor area of .
The exterior walls of the Logan Utah Temple were originally painted a buff color to hide the dark, rough-hewn limestone.
The Manti Utah Temple (3) is described as castellated style with influences of Gothic Revival, Neo-Renaissance, Second Empire and Colonial Revival architecture [REF].
The Salt Lake Temple (4) is the most recognizable of all Latter-day Saint temples and is an international symbol of the church.
The Temple is intended to evoke the Temple of Solomon at Jerusalem, and it is oriented towards Jerusalem.
The building has six spires, suggestive of Gothic and other classical styles but unique, distinctive, and symbolic.
The walls of the Salt Lake Temple are nine feet thick at the base and six feet thick at the top.
The Salt Lake Temple features murals on the walls of its progressive-style ordinance rooms, excluding the Terrestrial room and Celestial room, which is adorned in an elaborate French Renaissance Revival style.
This is the most symbolically adorned temple, surpassing the spiritual motifs of the Nauvoo Temple.
The east and west towers represent the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthoods, just as the east and west facing pulpits did in the Kirtland and Nauvoo assembly halls [REF].
Castle-like battlements surround the temple, symbolizing a separation from the world and a protection of the holy ordinances from the outside world.
At the base of each buttress is an earthstone.
Moonstones are located directly above the earthstones.
Two cloudstones are carved on the east center tower, with descending rays of light.
Various starstones adorn the temple.
The center west tower has a depiction of the Big Dipper constellation.
Each of the center towers has a carved All Seeing Eye of God, which represents God's ability to see and know all things.
Originally, the Vernal Utah Temple (51) served as the Uintah Stake Tabernacle for Latter-day Saints in eastern Utah.
Roger Jackson characterized the Uintah Stake Tabernacle as relatively modest, without the decorative details found on tabernacles in central and northern Utah.
The tabernacle was superseded by an adjacent, more modern LDS stake center in 1948.
A local "Save the Tabernacle" committee formed, and in 1989 a preservation study was prepared.
The Copenhagen Denmark Temple (118) is a renovation of an existing building, the Priorvej Chapel.
The day the chapel was dedicated, June 14, was the eighty-first anniversary of the day that the first Mormon missionaries arrived in Denmark.
The Copenhagen Denmark Temple has a total of , two ordinance rooms, and two sealing rooms.
The Manhattan New York Temple (119) was adapted from an existing stake center building-which stands at the intersection of West 65th Street, Broadway, and Columbus Avenue, and is across the street from the Lincoln Center-into the temple.
The temple occupies parts of the first floor and all of the fourth, fifth, and sixth floors of the building.
After the dedication, a special ceremony was held and a time capsule was placed in the cornerstone.
In a local church conference on November 12, 2006, it was officially announced that the fourth floor, which formerly housed classrooms and offices associated with the third-floor chapel and the old stake center, would be converted to become part of the temple.
On October 1, 2011, it was announced at the church's general conference that the Provo Tabernacle would be converted into Provo's second temple.
In October 1997, church president Gordon B. Hinckley announced a plan to build smaller temples that would provide the same functionality, but would be built in areas not typically suited for the larger temples the church had been building.
The Monticello Utah Temple (53) was the first of this new generation of smaller temples completed, opening in July 1998.
In April 1998, just six months following announcement of the intent to build the smaller temples, Hinckley announced plans to immediately begin construction of 32 more temples, with details to come later after consideration of needs, with a goal of having 100 temples in operation by the year 2000 [REF].
Occasionally the church would change the design slightly adding or removing square footage, but keeping the general design the same, with two ordinance rooms and two sealing rooms.
The church built several temples based on the two ordinance room plan, but added more square footage to accommodate an additional sealing room.
The temples vary in size.
The construction of the Cardston Alberta Temple (6), on June 27, 1913, started two decades after the completion of the Salt Lake Temple.
The design of the Cardston Alberta Temple served as the basic pattern for the Laie Hawaii Temple (5), which was completed four years before the Cardston temple.
The Laie Temple design is "suggestive of the ancient temples found in South America-shaped like a Grecian cross with no tower."[REF]
The Cardston and Mesa temples were originally built about the same size, but an addition in 1974 to the Mesa temple expanded its area to .
The Apia Samoa Temple (22) was built at this time, but during a renovation, the building caught fire and was destroyed.
Similar two ordinance room temples are the Nuku'alofa Tonga Temple (23) and the Santiago Chile Temple (24), with three sealing rooms, and the Papeete Tahiti Temple (25) and the Sydney Australia Temple (28), with two ordinance rooms.
Located in Freiberg, Saxony, Germany, the Freiberg Germany Temple (33) was announced in October 1982, ground was broken for construction on April 23, 1983, and the temple was dedicated in 1985.
The East German government approved the building of the temple on practical grounds, because of the many Latter-day Saints requesting visas to travel to Switzerland, the location of the Bern Switzerland Temple.
The temple was built on a very small scale, with no outward adornment of any kind.
After German reunification in 1990, Germany became the first country outside of North America to have more than one temple, this and the Frankfurt Germany Temple.
Political changes in Germany allowed for renovation of the temple from 2001 to 2002 to the high standards of temples built today.
The Washington D.C. Temple (16), located in Kensington, Maryland, was the first temple built on the east coast of the United States.
A very large plot of land on a wooded hill was bought in 1962 and eleven acres were cleared for the temple.
The México City México Temple (26) is located in the northeastern part of the Mexican capital, Mexico City.
The temple was built on a plot, has four ordinance rooms and 11 sealing rooms, and has a total floor area of .
The San Diego California Temple (45) is located in the La Jolla district of San Diego.
The exterior finish is marble chips in plaster, giving the building a bright white glow.
The temple was built on a plot, has four ordinance rooms and eight sealing rooms, and has a total floor area of .
The Hong Kong China Temple (48) was built on the site of an existing mission home and meetinghouse.
It has a total of , two ordinance rooms, and two sealing rooms.
The Idaho Falls Idaho Temple (8) was the first temple designed with a central spire.
The Oakland California Temple (13) is an unusual variation on the center spire design because it incorporates four additional spires-one on each corner of the building-for a total of five.
With the construction of the Ogden Utah Temple (14), the design was expanded, with six ordinance rooms and eleven sealing rooms and a floor area of .
The city is governed by a mayor and six councillors.
Ian Wishart, Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba, was elected to the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba in the 2011 general election in the Portage la Prairie provincial electoral district [REF].
Conservative Party member Candice Bergen (politician) was elected to the Parliament of Canada for the Portage-Lisgar riding in both the 2008 and 2011 federal elections [REF].
Various new residential developments and an upsurge in renovating older homes is contributing to the improvement of housing stock in the community.
Flooding also poses an occasional problem in the rural area of Portage la Prairie, especially during the spring.
In 2010 MoneySense as part of MSN's news site rated Portage la Prairie in a tie for Canada's worst city to live in, with relation to population decline,[REF] but at the same time was ranked the 69th, out of 180 cities, best place to live in Canada [REF].
Portage la Prairie railway station is served by Via Rail with both the Canadian and Winnipeg - Churchill trains calling at the station.
The Portage la Prairie Canadian Pacific Railway Station no longer receives passenger rail service, and is operated as a museum.
The Portage la Prairie Southport Airport is a former air force base and the primary airport in the city.
The area was first inhabited by Indigenous peoples (Plains Indians), long before European settlers began to arrive prior to 1850.
In 1851, Archdeacon William Cochrane (Cockran)[REF] of the Anglican Church, John McLean,[REF] as well as other ambitious settlers, were among the first to purchase the first land in the area from the local Aboriginals, around what is now Crescent Lake (formerly known as "The Slough").
The 1870s was a decade of rapid growth, as many more settlers moved to Portage, establishing farms and opening new businesses.
In 1907, Portage was incorporated as a city, and from that point on, managed to keep a gradual rate of growth and development, serving as a regional hub for agriculture, retail, manufacturing and transportation in central Manitoba.
During WWII, the Royal Canadian Air Force constructed Canadian Forces Base Portage la Prairie in support of the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan.
The name is derived from the French word portage, which means to carry a canoe overland between waterways.
One of Portage la Prairie's most popular attractions, the Community Walkway, which parallels Crescent Lake, is a , multi-use trail used for walking, bicycling, skateboarding and rollerblading, running past many grand heritage homes and the tranquil, picturesque sites along the lake.
Other attractions include the world's largest Coca-Cola can.
Heritage Square is an outdoor community meeting place (particularly in the summer months), located downtown.
The Portage Credit Union Centre opened in February 2010 and features two National Hockey League regulation size indoor arenas, one with seating capacity for 1,680, as well as an indoor pool and wave pool, it is also home to the farmers market.
Fort la Reine Museum is a heritage museum located on the east end of Portage.
The Manitoba Softball Hall of Fame/Museum is dedicated to the history of softball in Manitoba.
Portage la Prairie's City Hall is a limestone structure that was designed by Thomas Fuller, who also designed the Parliament Buildings in Ottawa.
Aside from City Hall, the city is home to many other heritage buildings.
Portage's largest hotel, part of Canad-Inns, is located in the west end of the city.
The community of Southport, located about south of Portage la Prairie, is home to a small recreation complex featuring a gymnasium and 5-pin bowling alley, aside from the proudly displayed military/air force history throughout the town and airport.
According to the 2016 Census, Portage la Prairie was home to 13,304 people, which was a 2.4% increase from the prior census in 2011.
The census also reports that 89.9% of the residents' mother tongue was English, followed by French (2.5%) and German (2.5%).
Portage la Prairie is mostly inhabited by Aboriginal and White people (97.2%).
Religiously speaking, most of the residents either practice a form of Christianity (66.4%) or have no religious affiliation at all (30.9%).
The local economy is largely dependent on agriculture and supporting industries (trucking, transportation, chemical/fertilizer, farm machinery dealerships, etc.).
The city has developed into a regional retail service center as large big box style stores began to operate on the west end of the city in 2007.
Portage la Prairie is a farming city, with an average of 122 frost free days,[REF] and a USDA Plant Hardiness Zone of 3a [REF].
Public education falls under the Portage la Prairie School Division [REF].
Portage Campus of the Red River College[REF] .
Portage Learning & Literacy Centre[REF] .
The city became a major transportation centre due to its proximity to the river, and later, the location of the main lines of the country's national railways passing through the community.
The city has an aggressive tree planting program and is known for its mature urban forest.
It is also the home of former Prime Minister of Canada Arthur Meighen
According to Environment Canada, Portage la Prairie has the most sunny days during the warm months in Canada [REF].
The Winnipeg Free Press and Winnipeg Sun are also available.
Television Portage la Prairie receives all television stations from nearby Winnipeg.
Cable television is also available through MTS Ultimate TV and Shaw Cable systems.
Portage la Prairie had a military airbase south of the community known as Canadian Forces Base Portage la Prairie, now 3 Canadian Forces Flying Training School.
In 1990, the federal government transferred the assets of the property to Southport Aerospace Centre Inc., a not-for-profit property management and development company whose goal was to successfully manage the site.
The 13th Field Battery of the 26th Field Artillery Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery is based out of Portage la Prairie.
During the Second World War an Algerine-class minesweeper commissioned into the Royal Canadian Navy was named after Portage la Prairie.
Portage la Prairie is home to the Portage Terriers, who play in the Manitoba Junior Hockey League, and the Central Plains Capitals, who play in the Manitoba Midget 'AAA' and Manitoba Female Midget Hockey Leagues.
Stride Place is the city's main recreation facility and houses two arenas, an aquatic centre, a fitness centre, and indoor walking track.
The Uniroyal/Goodrich World Junior Curling Championships were held at the Portage Curling Club in 1990.
As part of the 2012-13 World Curling Tour the city hosted the 2012 Canad Inns Prairie Classic which was won by Kevin Koe.
In recent years Portage has seen Roller Derby enter it's sports realm.
Portage is represented in the Manitoba Major Soccer League by the Portage Aeros in the MMSL Major Senior Division 4[REF] and by Portage United in the MMSL Major Senior Division 4 [REF].
Portage la Prairie also has a large amount of youth sports.
The 1865 Act unlocked some loan capital but it must be presumed that John Barrow funded much of the construction with personal money;[REF] the line was completed and opened from Pencader to Lampeter, opening on 1 January 1866 [REF].
M&MR goods trains were extended over the C&CR to Carmarthen on 1 November 1866 and passenger trains on 1 November 1867 [REF].
Onwards to Ystrad Meurig, the line was opened for goods trains by the end of August 1866 [REF].
The entire route of 41 miles was ready to be opened throughout, and this was done for passenger and goods trains on 12 August 1867 [REF].
Considering itself to be a trunk line, the M&MR publicity quoted connections from Liverpool and Manchester to Milford.
The train service on the M&MR remained pitifully slow, and onward connections were not easily made so that the Manchester to Milford Journey in mixed trains attaching wagons at wayside stations, was not pleasant for passengers.
From the end of July 1872, passenger trains ceased running south of Pencader; this was probably due to extreme financial difficulties forcing a reduction in running costs [REF].
The Mid Wales Railway should have been extending westwards to Yspytty Ystwyth to connect with the authorised M&MR section to that place; but as there was no sign of that happening, the M&MR did not waste money on its own section of the route.
David Davies and Thomas Savin were prominent railway contractors in Wales at the time, and offered to take shares in the concern as payment for construction of the northern part of the line.
The main physical obstacle was the great mass of Plynlimon, separating West Wales from the Severn Valley; it was to be tunnelled as part of the 50 mile section between Llanidloes and Pencader.
The L&NR pressed ahead with construction, and the section to Penpontbren and the joint Llanidloes station were completed in February 1864, and the L&NR transferred its own trains to the joint station, demoting its own terminus to a goods station.
Relations with Frederick Beeston, the M&MR's contractor, were difficult, and it is obvious that the M&MR, having little money in the capital account, had been unable to secure the land necessary for Beeston to make much progress.
The M&MR route as authorised was to run more or less direct from Lampeter through Tregaron and Devil's Bridge to Pant Mawr and Llanidloes.
The financial situation encouraged an alteration to the intended route.
At this stage two other railways, the Mid Wales Railway and the Swansea and Aberystwyth Junction Railway, were planning lines in the area.
The section of line from Llangurig to Penpontbren, about three miles, was completed in 1863, including track and signals, but was never opened as a railway.
The low baseline traffic levels on the line led to long-standing doubts about its future, and when the Beeching Report, The Reshaping of British Railways, was issued in 1963 it proposed that the line should close to traffic throughout.
On 14 December 1964 severe flooding of the River Ystwyth took place at Llanilar, severing the line there, and resulting in the immediate closure of the line north of Strata Florida.
The bay platform at Aberystwyth normally used by M&MR passenger trains is now used by Vale of Rheidol Railway trains [REF].
3 Lady Elizabeth, Sharp Stewart 2-4-0 Wks No 1756, delivered in July 1866.
4 Aberystwyth, Manning Wardle 0-6-0 Wks No 255, delivered in July 1868.
5 Sharp Stewart 0-6-0 Wks No 2036 in July 1870.
6 Cader Idris, Sharp Stewart 2-4-2T Wks No 4128.
7 London & North Western Railway 0-6-0 built at Crewe in November 1889 as L&NWR 1095.
8 Great Western Railway 2301 Class (Deans Goods) 0-6-0 (ex GW 2301) on loan from summer 1905.
9 Great Western Railway 2301 Class (Deans Goods) 0-6-0 (ex GW 2351) on loan from summer 1905.
10 Great Western Railway 2301 Class (Deans Goods) 0-6-0 (ex GW 2532) on loan from summer 1905.
Diesel locomotive operation on the line was introduced in 1963.
In the early years of the nineteenth century, Manchester and the surrounding districts had become dominant in many manufacturing industries, particularly textiles.
The cost and time taken for transport to and from Liverpool was nevertheless significant, and the existing water-borne transport routes were expensive and slow.
The scheme was to cost £2.6 million.
This was the time of the railway mania, when money was cheap and any number of railway schemes were put forward.
The Carmarthen and Cardigan Railway was promoted to connect Cardigan to the South Wales Railway and thence the railway network.
It had long been obvious that there was no self-created escape from the M&MR's financial difficulty.
The matter was not quickly resolved, but the Cambrian was regarded locally as an inefficient monopoly, and it had not paid a dividend for some time.
At this time the company's fleet consisted of eight engines, fourteen carriages and 117 goods vehicles [REF].
The GWR spent £57,000 on bringing the M&MR line up to a workable standard in the initial years of the lease.
The merger was inevitable[REF] and on 1 July 1911 the absorption of the Company by the Great Western took legal effect (by Act of 2 June 1911) [REF].
In the 1930s the passenger traffic on the line was further developed with five trains daily over the line, and additional services on summer Saturdays.
At Aberystwyth the M&MR was using the Aberystwyth and Welsh Coast Railway's station by agreement, and was due to pay a charge for the usage, laid down in the A&WCR Act of 1863.
The Manchester and Milford tried to claim against the Mid Wales Railway, which, it contended, should have built the connecting line from Llangurig to Strata Florida, which would have enabled the M&MR to use the expensively acquired rights at Llanidloes, but the attempt was rejected in the House of Lords.
There followed a long period of unedifying Board disagreements with the receiver, and improbably schemes that supposedly would resolve the company's financial ailments.
Income slightly improved in this time, and some work was done on relaying the track with recovered materials from the disused Llangurig spur line.
There was a short branch at Aberystwyth serving St David's Quay there.
There were steep gradients throughout the line, and generally the steepest were between 1 in 50 and 1 in 75.
Aberystwyth station was extensively modernised and remodelled in 1925.
Humans are a species in the fictional Star Wars universe.
The presence of ordinary humans in the story is important dramatically and the first movie establishes their vulnerability and weakness [REF].
As the series moved to the use of CGI, the digital representation of humans provided a challenge, since authentic simulation of humans is more difficult than for unknown aliens [REF].
In the Star Wars mythology, the human homeworld, according to the New Essential Chronology, is generally believed to be Coruscant.
Ithorians are a species of intelligent herbivores from the planet Ithor.
Ithorians have two mouths and glossy, brown flesh.
Ithorians are natives of the planet Ithor, a lush world with sprawling rain forests.
Abroad, Ithorians have integrated well with the intergalactic community.
Ithorian Roron Corobb was a Jedi Master who died protecting Chancellor Palpatine from General Grievous during the Clone Wars [REF].
As seen in Knights of the Old Republic II, Ithorians were also instrumental in the restoration of the planet Telos after it was destroyed by Sith during the Jedi Civil War.
The Grizmallt are the original settlers of Naboo.
In the final days of her life, Queen Tasia personally sponsored the last such expedition.
The inhabitants of Grizmallt assumed that Beneficent Tasia had been lost, but the starship did, in fact, survive the many hazards of unknown space.
Within weeks of their arrival, the settlers encountered the Gungans, the planet's native sentient species.
Gungans named the human sellers as "Naboo" , the Gungan word for "foolish" or "plainsfolk" as the humans settled on the dry grassy northern plains of the planet which the indigenous Gungans considered foolish, being undesirably dry and hostile to their way of life.
A Gamorrean is a large pig-like creature from the fictional Star Wars series [REF].
Physically, Gamorreans appear in Return of the Jedi as greenish, slimy (and apparently smelly) pig-like creatures.
In recent years, Howard Stern has referred frequently to "Gamorrean Guard", a person interviewed by Gary Garver at a Star Wars convention.
Gands are insectoids who evolved on the planet Gand.
Gands are not allowed to use personal pronouns unless they have achieved something extraordinary.
Many Gands choose a strange profession, the Findsman.
One of the best-known Gands is Zuckuss, who was a bounty hunter employed by Darth Vader to hunt down Han Solo, and was at one time the assistant to Bossk.
The Gungans, also known as Goongas, have humanoid amphibious bodies, but their heads are elongated with large, dangling fin-like ears.
The Gungans and the Naboo (human inhabitants of Naboo) did not get along, as the Gungans believed the Naboo to be pompous cowards, while the Naboo believed the Gungans to be barbarians.
The Gungans reproduce sexually; although they seem androgynous, the males tend to be taller and more muscular than the females, who usually tie their long ears back.
The Iktotchi are an alien race located in a remote system in the Expansion Region, next to the Corellian Run, along with neighboring planet Aridus.
When the Republic discovered their home planet, a moon orbiting the planet Iktotchon, they discovered a massive Old Republic seal visible from space with the naked eye.
One famous Iktotchi is Jedi Master Saesee Tiin, who sat on the Jedi Council [REF].
Iktotchi are also known for their skills as pilots.
The Geonosians are an insectoid species native to the planet Geonosis.
Geonosis (As seen in Episode II) is a barren rocky world home to thousands of factories geared towards mechanical construction.
Poggle the Lesser was a Geonosian who appeared in Episode II and oversaw the production of battle droids for the Trade Federation and later provided the bulk of the troops for the Confederacy of Independent Systems.
After the Clone Wars, Imperial forces started developing bases on Geonosis, and the majority of the population was forced into slavery under the Emperor's rule.
The Gran (also known as Kinyenians) are a three-eyed alien race, 1.5 to 1.8 meters in height.
A representative of this species is Maks Leem, a Jedi from the Old Republic, who was murdered by Asajj Ventress.
In the Expanded Universe, most notably in the video games, Grans have become one of the most prominent enemies the player has to face, which is seen in the Dark Forces/Jedi Knight games.
The Gorog (or the 'Dark Nest') are one of the eleven hives of the Killik who are an insectoid sentient species from the Unknown Regions.They have the ability to block themselves from the force, similar to the effect of the Ysalamiri of Myrkr and are a black and blue color.
Non Killiks become what are known as Joiners if they spend too long with the Killik.
The Killik naturally did not care about life much until the Crash.
The Gorog originally were based on the moon Kr on the Chiss border and were destroyed by Mara Jade and Luke Skywalker, Han and Leia Organa Solo, a group of Jedi Masters from the Jedi academy on Ossus and a squad of specially equipped 'Bugcruncher' battle droids.
There are other hives like the main hive Unu and the artistic hive Saras.
The Fosh are a sentient avian species.
The Fosh never had a large population on their planet, which prevented them from becoming an influential race as humans are in the Star Wars universe.
Fosh females have preternaturally developed tear ducts, used for mating purposes on their homeworld.
The only known Fosh, a female Jedi Knight named Vergere is also mentioned during Anakin Skywalker's time on Zonoma Sekot, as he recalls a flashback of her.
The Iridonians are humanoids whose most distinctive feature is the array of small horns on top of their heads.
Their crown of horns typically grow in at puberty, and are considered secondary sex characteristics.
Iridonian skin coloration can range from the rare pure white or pure black, to the more common shades of cream, red, peach, tan, and brown in between.
Iridonians can be completely bald or fully haired.
Iridonian eye colors are often similar to the eye colors of humans, with blues and browns being the most common.
Iridonians also traditionally have facial tattoos, typically composed of a pattern of thin lines - which is considered the most traditional of Iridonian tattoos.
Known Iridonians from canon include Agen Kolar, Eeth Koth, Gaar from the Boba Fett book, and Darth Maul.
Iridonians are sometimes called Zabrak, but this is simply an offshoot "sub-species" of the Iridonian race.
Daniel Clohesy, played by Thomas Blackburne, is a friend of Boyd Hoyland.
In February 2003, the BBC began a season of programmes on television, radio and online about the subject of domestic violence [REF].
Daniel is a friend of Boyd Hoyland from Erinsborough High.
Penny Watts, played by Andrea McEwan, made her first on-screen appearance on 16 May 2002 [REF].
Penny comes to the surgery to see Karl Kennedy (Alan Fletcher) about her tennis elbow, but he is not there and she sees Darcy Tyler instead.
Penny becomes friends with Stephanie Scully (Carla Bonner), who had also split up from her boyfriend.
Taj Coppin, played by Jaime Robbie Reyne, made his first on-screen appearance on 27 November 2002.
Taj attends Erinsborough High and becomes the captain of the football team.
Taj believes his relationship with Nina is going well and he buys her a ring, but he is surprised when she does not accept it.
On his 18th birthday, he drags Jack to a club after discovering Libby would be there.
The BBC said Taj's most notable moment was "His reaction to the news that Jack and Nina were having an affair."[REF]
Chloe Lambert, played by Stephanie Daniel, is the mother of Marc and Jordan Lambert.
Chloe and her husband, John Lambert (Barry O'Connor), take over Lassiter's and Chloe takes control of the day-to-day running of the hotel.
Chloe keeps a low profile around the town and the locals.
The BBC said Chloe's most notable moment was "Being tied up with Darcy for the night while her house was being robbed."[REF] .
Tahnee Coppin, played by Anna Jennings-Edquist,[REF] is the sister of Taj Coppin.
Tahnee pursues Michelle Scully's (Kate Keltie) boyfriend, Connor O'Neil (Patrick Harvey), despite being warned off.
Connor enters Nina's song, "Born To Try", into UniFM's undiscovered talent contest.
The BBC said Tahnee's most notable moment was "Blackmailing Connor over his illiteracy."[REF]
Marcus "Marc" Lambert, played by David Karakai, made his first appearance on 20 February 2002.
Karakai told the BBC that he thinks his character is suited to both Stephanie (Carla Bonner) and Felicity (Holly Valance) and that Marc wants both of them [REF].
Marc was brought up within a wealthy family and he did not have to work hard for the things in his life.
Marc realises that his feelings for Felicity are stronger than his feelings for Steph.
The BBC said Marc's most notable moment was "Calling off the wedding when he was supposed to say I do."[REF]
Reverend Rosie Hoyland (née Barclay), played by Maggie Millar, made her first on-screen appearance on 13 March 2002.
Rosie arrives in Erinsborough as the new reverend of St. Stephens Church.
Rosie supports Harold when he temporarily loses his sigh and keeps him company in the hospital.
Rosie's conventional approach to community and church-related matters makes the Bishop uncomfortable and he eventually has Rosie transferred out of Erinsborough.
A BBC writer stated that Rosie's most notable moment was "Escaping from the burning church in episode 4000."[REF] .
Valda Lynette Sheergold, played by Joan Sydney, made her first on-screen appearance on 22 May 2002.
Lyn Scully (Janet Andrewartha) announces that her Aunt Valda cannot make Stephanie (Carla Bonner) and Marc's (David Karakai) wedding, much to the family's relief.
Valda helps Lyn during her pregnancy, but Lyn finds Valda's advice hard to take as she does not have any children of her own.
When she finds out Lou is engaged to Trixie Tucker (Wendy Stapleton), she is devastated.
Paul Kalina of The Age said Valda is "a Margaret Thatcher-lookalike whose gravity-defying hairdo probably accounts for the hole in the ozone layer."[REF]
Carmel Tyler, played by Kirsty Child, made her first screen appearance on 10 July 2002 [REF].
A Channel 5 website writer stated that Carmel and Susan's "strong personalities will have them butting heads in no time.
Carmel is Susan and Liz's (Christine Keogh) sister and the mother of Darcy Tyler (Mark Raffety).
Ten years later, Carmel comes to visit Susan in Erinsborough.
Ruby Dwyer, played by Maureen Edwards, made her first on-screen appearance on 8 November 2002.
Harold Bishop (Ian Smith) meets Ruby through a dating agency.
Ruby offers to mind Harold's home, while he stays in hospital.
Ruby returns to town not long after and Harold is happy to see her.
The BBC said Ruby's most notable moment was "organising to have Harold's house robbed to fund her gambling habit."[REF] .
His first season (2005) was an improvement with a 9-3 record, including an Outback Bowl win against the Iowa Hawkeyes [REF].
The 2008 Gators responded as a vastly improved team.
On December 26, 2009, Meyer announced he would resign as the Gators' head coach after their bowl game due to health and family concerns [REF].
The Gators improved under coach Bob Woodruff during the 1950s.
The Gators peaked under Woodruff during the 1952 season, posting an 8-3 record and a number-15 AP Poll ranking [REF].
Woodruff never equaled the success of his 1952 team, in part due to a 1953 NCAA rule change forbidding unlimited substitutions.
The 1957 team upset Billy Cannon and his 10th-ranked LSU Tigers, finishing with a number-17 AP ranking [REF].
Woodruff finished his Gator career with a 53-42-6 record [REF].
Florida alumnus and former quarterback Doug Dickey took over the reins in 1970.
Beginning in 1972, for the first time since 1921,[REF] freshmen were permitted to play on southeastern teams [REF].
The 1976 and 1977 teams featured All-American wide receiver Wes Chandler, widely considered one of Florida's best all-around football players[REF] and voted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 2015 [REF].
The Gators had a 6-4-1 season in 1977, and Chandler was 10th in balloting for the Heisman Trophy [REF].
The University of the State of Florida was in Lake City during its first year of existence (1905-06), while the first buildings of its new campus were constructed in Gainesville [REF].
Football and baseball games and track meets were held at University Athletic Field, a grassy playing surface flanked by low bleachers on West University Avenue just north of the present stadium site.
The school's first football coach was "Pee Wee" Forsythe, who led the Florida team for three winning seasons (including a 6-0 win over the Rollins College Tars in their first game).
The new university's name was shortened to University of Florida in 1909, and George Pyle became the new head coach of its football team.
Before the 1912 season Florida joined the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association (SIAA),[REF] the first southern athletics conference,[REF] and began the season by facing the Auburn Tigers for the first time [REF].
The 1913 Gators began the season by defeating Southern 144-0, the widest margin of victory in program history [REF].
In C. J. McCoy's first season, 1914, the team posted a much-improved 5-2 record.
McCoy felt he had the makings of a great Gators squad in 1916, compiling the most ambitious and difficult Gators football schedule to date [REF].
After the winless 1916 season the Gators hired Al Buser, a former All-American lineman for the Wisconsin Badgers, who promised to use a Midwestern, power-football style of play to revive the team [REF].
In 1920 the Gators hired William G. Kline, former halfback for the Illinois Fighting Illini who had coached the Nebraska Cornhuskers, as head coach [REF].
The 1922 Gators had a 7-2 record.
Despite intermittent success, Florida had never been considered a consistent national power.
The 1993 season was the first in which the Gators were ranked in the AP top ten every week.
The Gators were first in the preseason AP Poll for the first time in 1994, remaining there until their loss to Auburn [REF].
Florida had its first undefeated, untied regular season in 1995.
Most of Florida's 1996 offensive players were returning upperclassmen, who set dozens of team scoring records as they began the season with a 10-0 record.
The 1997 Gators seemed poised for another title, never trailing Manning-led Tennessee at home to regain the top spot in the polls.
Florida went three seasons before recapturing an SEC title in 2000 [REF].
Florida attained its first consistent success in the 1960s, when Ray Graves coached the team to three nine-win seasons and a total of seventy victories[REF] (a Florida record for twenty-seven years) [REF].
Among the 1960 season's highlights was the Gators' 18-17 upset of Dodd's tenth-ranked Yellow Jackets and a hard-fought 13-12 victory over the twelfth-ranked Baylor Bears in the Gator Bowl on New Year's Eve [REF].
Graves signed Leonard George and Willie Jackson, Sr., the Gators' first two black football players, on December 17 and 18, 1968 [REF].
Graves' 1969 season (his last) is remembered for the "Super Sophs", which included quarterback John Reaves, All-American wide receiver Carlos Alvarez, and tailback Tommy Durrance's 110-point season scoring record [REF].
On December 11, 2010, Florida named Texas defensive coordinator Will Muschamp as the Gators' new head coach [REF].
The 2012 defense was much improved.
The 2013 season was the Gators' worst since 1979.
The 1930s and 1940s were difficult for the Gators.
UF joined the new Southeastern Conference (SEC) in December 1932 with twelve other former members of the Southern Conference.
Gator alumnus Dutch Stanley, an end (opposite Van Sickel) on the 1928 team, replaced Bachman as coach in the first SEC football season in 1933.
Dutch Stanley resigned as head coach in response to fan pressure after the 1935 season and became an assistant to his successor, Josh Cody.
In 1936, Cody's first season, Florida had one conference victory.
Tom Lieb, who had most recently posted a winning record at Loyola, replaced Cody as head coach in 1940.
The 1941 season was disappointing, except for a 14-0 road upset of Miami and a hard-fought 14-7 homecoming victory against Georgia Tech.
During the World War II years of 1942 to 1945, most of the university's able-bodied students withdrew and enlisted in the U.S. military.
Returning war veterans arrived on the Gainesville campus in the fall of 1946.
The first season for Wolf was poor; the 1946 Gators finished with a 0-9 record, the worst in school history.
Gator running back Chuck Hunsinger was first-team All-SEC in 1948 and 1949, rushing for a career 2,017 yards [REF].
The 1920s and early 1930s saw the Gators' first inter-sectional victories and their first wins over several regular opponents.
James Van Fleet, a U.S. Army major and assistant coach under Kline, coached the 1923 and 1924 teams to 6-1-2 and 6-2-2 records [REF].
Led by new head coach Tom Sebring, a former football star for the Kansas State Wildcats, the 1925 Gators finished 8-2 (the first season with that many wins) [REF].
The injury-plagued 1926 team posted a 2-6-2 record [REF].
Coach Charlie Bachman led the Gators to national recognition, taking over as head coach in 1928.
The 1929 Gators lost only to defending national champion Georgia Tech and Harvard [REF].
Winning four of eighteen games over the next two seasons (1931 and 1932), Bachman ended his tenure on a high note in his final game with a 12-2 inter-sectional upset of the UCLA Bruins [REF].
Florida athletic director Jeremy Foley initiated a coaching search which focused on Denver Broncos head coach Mike Shanahan[REF] and Oklahoma Sooners head coach Bob Stoops.
Zook was a strong recruiter, signing the twentieth-ranked class in an abbreviated 2002 search,[REF] the second-ranked class in 2003,[REF] and the seventh-ranked class in 2004 [REF].
After two consecutive five-loss seasons, the 2004 season was a make-or-break year for Zook.
Charley Pell was hired as Florida's new head coach for the 1979 season [REF].
The 1979 season was a 0-10-1 disaster,[REF] but Pell's Gators improved after he hired offensive coach Mike Shanahan.
The Gators ended their season with a 35-20 victory against the Maryland Terrapins in the Tangerine Bowl, the first time a winless team received a bowl invitation the following season.
Before the 1990s, Florida's 1984 team was considered by many the best in school history [REF].
Pell did not finish the 1984 season with the team.
The greatest player during Hall's tenure was All-American running back Emmitt Smith, who set school and conference rushing records from 1987 to 1989 [REF].
Another NCAA infraction scandal would end Hall's tenure at Florida.
Santa Rosa is located at [REF] in Sonoma County.
The city is part of the North Bay region, which includes such cities as Petaluma, Rohnert Park, Windsor, and smaller cities as Sonoma, Healdsburg, Sebastopol.
Santa Rosa lies on the Santa Rosa Plain.
The city is in the watershed of Santa Rosa Creek, which rises on Hood Mountain and discharges to the Laguna de Santa Rosa.
The prominent visual features east of the city include Bennett Peak, Mount Hood, and Sonoma and Taylor Mountains [REF].
In the United States House of Representatives, Santa Rosa is in [REF].
In the California State Legislature, the city is in California's 2nd State Senate district.
The city's Mayor is Chris Coursey, the Vice Mayor is Jack Tibbetts, and the other five council members are Julie Combs, Ernesto Olivares, Chris Rogers, John Sawyer, and Tom Schwedhelm [REF].
Shadow of a Doubt (1943), Alfred Hitchcock's personal favorite, filmed at Santa Rosa Railroad Depot, NWP Engine #140, Old Courthouse Square, Public Library, and McDonald Avenue.
The Sullivans (1944), shot on Morgan Street.
All My Sons (1948), shot on McDonald Avenue.
Storm Center (1956) - Bette Davis spent six weeks on location at the Santa Rosa Main Library, which keeps a collection of clippings.
Pollyanna (1960), featured the Mableton Mansion (also known as the McDonald Mansion), on McDonald Avenue.
The Wonderful World of Disney - The "Inky the Crow" episodes (beginning in the late 1960s), filmed in the Fountain Grove area.
It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World (1963) - the sequence involving the plane flying full bore, at about 150 knots, through an airplane hangar in less than a second, was shot at the Sonoma County Airport, just north of Santa Rosa.
The Candidate (1972), directed by Michael Ritchie, shot in Howarth Park and Schlumberger Gallery.
Slither (1972) - Highway 101 south of Santa Rosa, and Cloverdale.
Steelyard Blues (1973), shot in downtown Santa Rosa and at the Sonoma County Airport.
Smile (1975), shot at the Veterans Memorial Auditorium and many other nearby locations.
Little Miss Marker (1980), shot at the Sonoma County Fairgrounds.
Shoot the Moon (1982), used a real Carl's Jr. on Industrial Drive at Cleveland Avenue.
Cujo (1983) - locations include Santa Rosa and Petaluma.
Smooth Talk (1985) - locations include Santa Rosa shopping malls and Sebastopol.
Peggy Sue Got Married (1986) - locations include Santa Rosa High School and Petaluma.
Wildfire (1988) - includes Wood Pontiac & Cadillac on Corby Avenue.
Wired (1989) - filmed in Santa Rosa.
Die Hard 2 (1990) - scenes shot at Santa Rosa Air Center.
Phenomenon (1996) - used Santa Rosa Junior College as an establishing shot for UC Berkeley.
Scream (1996) - scenes show a house on McDonald Avenue, a local grocery store, and the Bradley Video Store on Marlow Road.
Inventing the Abbotts (1997), shot at Santa Rosa High School, on location in Healdsburg and Petaluma.
Mumford (1999), shot at Santa Rosa Junior College, other Santa Rosa locations, and in Guerneville and Healdsburg.
Cheaper by the Dozen (2003) - filmed in Railroad Square.
Paranormal Activity 3 (2011) - set in Santa Rosa during the 1980s.
Bad Ass (2012) - set in Santa Rosa in 1957 .
Santa Rosa sits at the northwestern gateway to the Sonoma and Napa Valleys of California's famed Wine Country.
The city sprawls along U.S. Route 101, about an hour north of San Francisco and the Golden Gate Bridge.
The City Council pays the Santa Rosa Chamber of Commerce to operate the Santa Rosa Convention & Visitors Bureau [REF].
Downtown Santa Rosa, including the central Old Courthouse Square and historic Railroad Square, is an area of shopping, restaurants, nightclubs, and theaters.
The City Council funds a private booster group, Santa Rosa Main Street, which lobbies the city to revitalize the traditional business district.
The nearby cities and towns of Bodega Bay, Calistoga, Guerneville, Healdsburg, Petaluma, Sebastopol, Sonoma, and Windsor are popular with tourists and readily accessible from Santa Rosa.
Railroad Square is the portion of downtown that is on the west side of U.S. Route 101 and has the highest concentration of historic commercial buildings.
The annual Luther Burbank Rose Parade and Festival .
Santa Rosa lies atop the Healdsburg-Rodgers Creek segment of the Hayward-Rodgers Creek Fault System.
On April 14, 2005, the United States Geological Survey released a map detailing the results of a new tool that measures ground shaking during an earthquake.
On October 1, 1969, two earthquakes of magnitudes 5.6 and 5.7 shook Santa Rosa, damaging about 100 structures.
Before the arrival of Europeans, the wide valley containing Santa Rosa was home to a strong and populous tribe of Pomo natives known as the Bitakomtara.
The first known permanent European settlement of Santa Rosa was the homestead of the Carrillo family, in-laws to Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo, who settled the Sonoma pueblo and Petaluma area.
By the 1850s, a Wells Fargo post and general store were established in what is now downtown Santa Rosa.
In 1867, the county recognized Santa Rosa as an incorporated city and in 1868 the state officially confirmed the incorporation, making it officially the third incorporated city in Sonoma County, after Petaluma, incorporated in 1858, and Healdsburg, incorporated in 1867.
The U.S. Census records, among others, show that after California became a state, Santa Rosa grew steadily early on, despite initially lagging behind nearby Petaluma in the 1850s and early 1860s.
The 1906 San Francisco earthquake essentially destroyed the entire downtown, but the city's population did not greatly suffer.
Famed director Alfred Hitchcock filmed his thriller Shadow of a Doubt in Santa Rosa in 1943
Santa Rosa grew following World War II.
The population increased by 2/3 between 1950 and 1970, an average of 1,000 new residents a year over the 20 years.
In 1958 the United States Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization designated Santa Rosa as one of its eight regional headquarters, with jurisdiction over Region 7, which included American Samoa, Arizona, California, Guam, Hawaii, Nevada, and Utah.
When the City Council adopted the city's first modern General Plan in 1991, the population was about 113,000.
Santa Rosa 2010, the 1991 General Plan, called for a population of 175,000 in 2010.
At the first five-year update of the plan, in 1996, the Council extended the planning period by ten years, renaming it Vision 2020 (updated to Santa Rosa 2020, and then again to Santa Rosa 2030 Vision), and added more land and population.
The 2010 United States Census[REF] reported that Santa Rosa had a population of 167,815.
The Census reported that 164,405 people (98.0% of the population) lived in households, 1,697 (1.0%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 1,713 (1.0%) were institutionalized.
There were 63,590 households, out of which 20,633 (32.4%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 27,953 (44.0%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 7,663 (12.1%) had a female householder with no husband present, 3,615 (5.7%) had a male householder with no wife present.
In terms of age cohorts, there were 39,217 people (23.4%) under the age of 18, 15,982 people (9.5%) aged 18 to 24, 46,605 people (27.8%) aged 25 to 44, 43,331 people (25.8%) aged 45 to 64, and 22,680 people (13.5%) who were 65 years of age or older.
There were 67,396 housing units at an average density of 1,624.0 per square mile (627.0/km2), of which 34,427 (54.1%) were owner-occupied, and 29,163 (45.9%) were occupied by renters.
, there are an estimated 4,539 homeless people living in Sonoma County, many of whom live in Santa Rosa [REF].
Santa Rosa's Hispanic population, mainly of Mexican descent, while spread out through the city, is concentrated within the western part of Santa Rosa [REF].
The Southeast Asian communities, mainly Vietnamese, Laotian, and Cambodian, are concentrated within the western Santa Rosa neighborhoods of Bellevue Ranch, Roseland, and West Steele areas.
As of the census of 2000, there were 63,153 households, of which 30.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.9% were married couples living together, 11.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.3% were non-families.
In terms of age cohorts, 24.3% of the population was under the age of 18, 9.5% was from 18 to 24, 30.0%
The median income for a household in the city was $50,931, and the median income for a family was $59,659.
The Santa Rosa Police Department currently has 259 employees, of which 172 are sworn peace officers.
Neighborhoods such as South Park in south Santa Rosa, and Roseland, West Ninth District, and Apple Valley in west Santa Rosa, are most vulnerable to criminal activity.
On May 9, 1878, Charles Henley, a 57-year-old farmer from Windsor, California, murdered his neighbor James Rowland after Rowland complained about Henley's pigs being loose on his property.
On December 5, 1920, Santa Rosa native Terry Fitts, along with San Francisco hoodlums "Spanish" Charley Valento and George Boyd, got into a shootout with a joint police squad from Santa Rosa, Sonoma County and the San Francisco Police department.
On July 15, 1935, disgruntled rancher and hunting guide Al Chamberlain dressed up in his finest cowboy clothes, drove to his former ranch outside of Santa Rosa and shot John McCabe, the new owner of the property, leaving him for dead.
On October 22, 2013, 13-year-old Andy Lopez was shot and killed by Sonoma County sheriff's deputy Erick Gelhaus in the Moorland neighborhood of Santa Rosa.
The performing arts in Santa Rosa are represented by the Sonoma County Philharmonic, the Summer Repertory Theatre, the Santa Rosa Symphony, and the 6th Street Playhouse.
The Sonoma County Philharmonic performs at the Santa Rosa High School Performing Arts Auditorium.
Summer Repertory Theater (SRT) is a complete and extensive practicum in all aspects of stage production.
The 85-year-old Santa Rosa Symphony Orchestra performs at Green Music Center in Rohnert Park, a new venue with traditional "shoebox" acoustics.
The visual arts are represented by the Sonoma County Museum and numerous independent art galleries.
The Sonoma County Library offers a Central Library in downtown Santa Rosa, a Northwest branch at Coddingtown Mall, and a Rincon Valley branch in east Santa Rosa.
The Sonoma County Public Law Library[REF] is located at the Sonoma County Courthouse.
At Santa Rosa Junior College, the four-story Frank P. Doyle Library[REF] is a state-of-the-art facility.
The Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem demonstrates that no (deterministic, non-dictatorial) voting method using only the preference rankings of the voters can be entirely immune from tactical voting.
Scholarly research conclude that IRV is one of the less-manipulable voting methods, with theorist Nicolaus Tideman noting that, "alternative vote is quite resistant to strategy"[REF] and Australian political analyst Antony Green dismissing suggestions of tactical voting [REF].
By not meeting the monotonicity, Condorcet winner, and participation criteria, IRV permits forms of tactical voting when voters have sufficient information about other voters' preferences, such as from accurate pre-election polling [REF].
Tactical voting in IRV seeks to alter the order of eliminations in early rounds, to ensure that the original winner is challenged by a stronger opponent in the final round.
The 2009 mayoral election in Burlington, Vermont provides an example in which strategy theoretically could have worked but would have been unlikely in practice.
The spoiler effect is when a difference is made to the anticipated outcome of an election due to the presence on the ballot paper of a candidate who (predictably) will lose.
However, when the third party candidate is more competitive, they can still act as a spoiler under IRV,[REF][REF][REF][REF] by taking away first-choice votes from the more mainstream candidate until that candidate is eliminated, and then that candidate's second-choice votes helping a more-disliked candidate to win.
For example, in the 2009 Burlington, Vermont mayoral election, if the Republican candidate who lost in the final instant runoff had not run, the Democratic candidate would have defeated the winning Progressive candidate.
In practice, IRV does not seem to discourage candidacies.
Instant-runoff voting is used for national elections in Australia to elect members of the Australian House of Representatives.
Also called the Alternative Vote in Canada,[REF] IRV has never been used for federal elections but was used for provincial elections in British Columbia (1952 and 1953), Alberta (1926), and Manitoba (1927-1953) [REF].
The province of Ontario has announced that they will allow municipalities the option to use instant-runoff voting for local elections starting in 2018 [REF].
IRV is used to elect leaders of the Green party [REF].
IRV is used to elect a small number of functional constituencies of the Legislative Council, all of which have very small electorates.
IRV is used in numerous electoral college environments, including the election of the President of India by the members of the Parliament of India and of the Vidhan Sabhas - the state legislatures [REF].
While most elections in the Republic of Ireland use the single transferable vote (STV),[REF] in single-winner contests this reduces to IRV [REF].
IRV is used in the elections of mayors and councillors in single-member wards in some New Zealand cities, such as Dunedin and Wellington.
IRV, under the name Alternative Vote, was one of the four alternative methods available (alongside MMP, STV and SM) in the 1992 referendum on the voting method to elect MP's to the New Zealand House of Representatives.
IRV (again under the name Preferential Vote[REF]) was used on the initial ballot of the 2015-2016 New Zealand flag referendums for voters to rank their preferences about the five new flag options.
Since 2003, the national parliament of Papua New Guinea has been elected using an IRV variant called Limited Preferential Voting, where voters are limited to ranking three candidates [REF].
In the United Kingdom the method is commonly known as the alternative vote.
In 2010, the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government agreed to hold a national referendum on the alternative vote,[REF] held on 5 May 2011 [REF].
IRV is used by several municipalities and other jurisdictions in the United States, including San Francisco[REF] and Oakland, California,[REF] and Minneapolis and Saint Paul, Minnesota [REF].
The costs of printing and counting ballot papers for an IRV election are no different from those of any other method using the same technology.
Because it does not require two separate votes, IRV is assumed to cost less than two-round primary/general or general/runoff election methods [REF].
Australian elections are counted by hand.
The perceived costs or cost savings of adopting an IRV method are commonly used by both supporters and critics.
Instant-runoff voting derives its name from the way the ballot count simulates a series of runoffs, similar to a two-round system, except that voter preferences do not change between rounds [REF].
When the single transferable vote (STV) method is applied to a single-winner election it becomes IRV.
North Carolina law uses "instant runoff" to describe the contingent vote or "batch elimination" form of IRV in one-seat elections.
John Russo, Oakland City Attorney, argued in the Oakland Tribune on 24 July 2006 that "Instant runoff voting is an antidote to the disease of negative campaigning.
In 2013-2014, the Rutgers-Eagleton Poll surveyed more than 4,800 likely voters in 21 cities after their local city elections-half in cities with IRV elections and 14 in control cities selected by project leaders Caroline Tolbert of the University of Iowa and Todd Donovan of Western Washington University.
Internationally, Benjamin Reilly suggests instant-runoff voting eases ethnic conflict in divided societies [REF].
There are a number of variations in IRV.
In an optional preferential voting system, voters can give a preference to as many candidates as they wish.
In a full preferential voting method, voters are required to mark a preference for every candidate standing [REF].
Other methods only allow marking a preference for the voter's top three favorites [REF].
Instant-runoff voting was devised in 1871 by American architect William Robert Ware,[REF] although it is, in effect, a special case of the single transferable vote method, which emerged independently in the 1850s.
The first known use of an IRV-like method in a governmental election was in the 1893 general election in the Colony of Queensland (in present-day Australia) [REF].
IRV was introduced for federal (nationwide) elections in Australia after the Swan by-election in October 1918, in response to the rise of the conservative Country Party, representing small farmers.
Scholars rate voting methods using mathematically-derived voting method criteria, which describe desirable features of a method.
Many of the mathematical criteria by which voting methods are compared were formulated for voters with ordinal preferences.
The criteria that IRV meets, and those that it does not, are listed below.
Majority criterion The majority criterion states that "if one candidate is preferred by an absolute majority of voters, then that candidate must win".
Mutual majority criterion The mutual majority criterion states that "if an absolute majority of voters prefer every member of a group of candidates to every candidate not in that group, then one of the preferred group must win".
Later-no-harm criterion The later-no-harm criterion states that "if a voter alters the order of candidates lower in his/her preference (e.g.
Resolvability criterion The resolvability criterion states that "the probability of an exact tie must diminish as more votes are cast".
Condorcet winner criterion The Condorcet winner criterion states that "if a candidate would win a head-to-head competition against every other candidate, then that candidate must win the overall election".
IRV is more likely to elect the Condorcet winner than plurality voting and traditional runoff elections.
Condorcet loser criterion The Condorcet loser criterion states that "if a candidate would lose a head-to-head competition against every other candidate, then that candidate must not win the overall election".
Consistency criterion The consistency criterion states that if dividing the electorate into two groups and running the same election separately with each group returns the same result for both groups, then the election over the whole electorate should return this result.
Participation criterion The participation criterion states that "the best way to help a candidate win must not be to abstain" [REF].
Reversal symmetry criterion The reversal symmetry criterion states that "if candidate A is the unique winner, and each voter's individual preferences are inverted, then A must not be elected".
Independence of irrelevant alternatives criterion The independence of irrelevant alternatives criterion states that "the election outcome remains the same even if a candidate who cannot win decides to run."
Independence of clones criterion The independence of clones criterion states that "the election outcome remains the same even if an identical candidate who is equally preferred decides to run."
The term instant runoff voting is derived from the name of a class of voting methods called runoff voting.
A method closer to IRV is the exhaustive ballot.
The simplest form of runoff voting is the two-round system, which typically excludes all but two candidates after the first round, rather than gradually eliminating candidates over a series of rounds.
The contingent vote, also known as Top-two IRV, or batch-style, is the same as IRV except that if no candidate achieves a majority in the first round of counting, all but the two candidates with the most votes are eliminated, and the second preferences for those ballots are counted.
Under a variant of contingent voting used in Sri Lanka, and the elections for Mayor of London in the United Kingdom, voters rank a specified maximum number of candidates.
While similar to "sequential-elimination" IRV, top-two can produce different results.
Conversely, a practical benefit of 'contingent voting' is expediency and confidence in the result with only two rounds.
IRV can quickly eliminate weak candidates in early rounds of an exhaustive ballot runoff, using rules to leave the desired number of candidates for further balloting.
IRV allows an arbitrary victory threshold in a single round of voting, e.g., 60%.
IRV elections that require a majority of cast ballots but not that voters rank all candidates may require more than a single IRV ballot due to exhausted ballots.
Robert's Rules recommends preferential voting for elections by mail and requiring a majority of cast votes to elect a winner, giving IRV as their example.
The common feature of these IRV variations is that one vote is counted per ballot per round, with rules that eliminate the weakest candidate(s) in successive rounds.
In instant-runoff voting, as with other ranked election methods, each voter ranks the list of candidates in order of preference.
The mechanics of the process are the same regardless of how many candidates the voter ranks, and how many are left unranked.
In the initial count, the first preference of each voter is counted and used to order the candidates.
Ballots assigned to eliminated candidates are recounted and assigned to one of the remaining candidates based on the next preference on each ballot.
In Australian elections the allocation of preferences is performed efficiently at the polling booth by having the returning officer pre-declare the two likely winners.
The common way to list candidates on a ballot paper is alphabetically or by random lot.
Where preferential voting is used for the election of an assembly or council, parties and candidates often advise their supporters on their lower preferences, especially in Australia where a voter must rank all candidates to cast a valid ballot.
Most IRV elections historically have been tallied by hand, including in elections to Australia's House of Representatives and most state governments.
In Australia, the returning officer now usually declares the two candidates that are most likely to win each seat.
(The declaration by the returning officer is simply to optimize the counting process.
Ireland in its presidential elections has several dozen counting centers around the nation.
In the United States, some Californian cities, e.g.
Some examples of IRV elections are given below.
A simple example is provided in the accompanying table.
In Round 1, the first-choice rankings are tallied, with the results that Bob and Sue both have two votes and Bill has one.
Most instant-runoff voting elections are won by the candidate who leads in first-choice rankings.
If one of the cities had achieved a majority vote (more than half), the election would end there.
So we move to the second round of tabulation to determine which of the front-running cities had broader support.
In the first round, Memphis was first, Nashville was second and Knoxville was third.
As in the second round with Chattanooga, all of the ballots currently counting for Nashville are added to the totals of Memphis or Knoxville based on which city is ranked next on that ballot.
For comparison, note that traditional first-past-the-post voting would elect Memphis, even though most citizens consider it the worst choice, because 42% is larger than any other single city.
In 2006, the U.S. city of Burlington, Vermont, held a mayoral election using instant-runoff voting.
After the first round, all but the top two candidates were eliminated, as their combined vote total (2,863) was less than Miller's, so that none could pull ahead of Miller, even by receiving every vote from the other minor candidates.
The result of the 1990 Irish presidential election provides an example of how instant-runoff voting can produce a different result from first-past-the-post voting.
The Viceroyalty of New Spain united many regions and provinces of the Spanish Empire throughout half a world.
In the Caribbean it included Cuba, Santo Domingo, most of the Venezuelan mainland and the other islands in the Caribbean controlled by the Spanish.
The Viceroyalty was administered by a viceroy residing in Mexico City and appointed by the Spanish monarch, who had administrative oversight of all of these regions, although most matters were handled by the local governmental bodies, which ruled the various regions of the viceroyalty.
Audiencia districts further incorporated the older, smaller divisions known as governorates (gobernaciones, roughly equivalent to provinces), which had been originally established by conquistador-governors known as adelantados.
At the local level there were over two hundred districts, in both Indian and Spanish areas, which were headed by either a corregidor (also known as an alcalde mayor) or a cabildo (town council), both of which had judicial and administrative powers.
The high courts or audiencias were established in major areas of Spanish settlement.
1. Santo Domingo (1511, effective 1526, predated the Viceroyalty) 2. Mexico (1527, predated the Viceroyalty) 3. Panama (1st one, 1538-1543) 4. Guatemala (1543) 5. Guadalajara (1548) 6. Manila (1583) .
1. Santo Domingo (1535) .
3. Puerto Rico (1580) .
4. Cuba (1607) - which included Spanish Florida, or La Florida, in North America .
7. Commandancy General of the Provincias Internas (1776) (Analogous to a dependent captaincy general.) .
As part of the sweeping eighteenth-century administrative and economic changes known as the Bourbon Reforms, the Spanish crown created new administrative units called intendancies.
Spanish settlers brought to the American continent smallpox, typhoid fever, and other diseases.
Following the Spanish conquests, new ethnic groups were created, primary among them the Mestizo.
Initially, if a child was born in wedlock, the child was considered, and raised as, a member of the prominent parent's ethnicity.
The Spanish conquest also brought the migration of people of African descent to the many regions of the Viceroyalty.
Even if mixes were common, the white population tried to keep their higher status, and were largely successful in doing so.
Population estimates from the first decade of the 19th century varied between 6,122,354 as calculated by Francisco Navarro y Noriega in 1810,[REF] to 6.5 million as figured by Alexander von Humboldt in 1808 [REF].
The Third Treaty of San Ildefonso ceded to France the vast territory that Napoleon then sold to the United States, known as the Louisiana Purchase (1803).
In the 1821 Declaration of Independence of the Mexican Empire, both Mexico and Central America declared their independence after three centuries of Spanish rule and formed the First Mexican Empire, although Central America quickly rejected the union.
The new Mexican Empire offered the crown to Ferdinand VII or to a member of the Spanish royal family that he would designate.
This left only Cuba and Puerto Rico in the Spanish West Indies, and the Spanish East Indies (including the Philippines and Guam) in the Spanish Empire; until their loss to the United States in the Spanish-American War (1898).
The capital of Viceroyalty of New Spain, Mexico City, was one of the principal centers of European cultural expansion in the Americas.
The first printing press in the New World was brought to Mexico in 1539, by printer Juan Pablos (Giovanni Paoli).
Architects Pedro Martínez Vázquez and Lorenzo Rodriguez produced some fantastically extravagant and visually frenetic architecture known as Mexican Churrigueresque in the capital, Ocotlan, Puebla or remote silver-mining towns.
The first century that saw the Bourbons on the Spanish throne coincided with series of global conflicts that pitted primarily France against Great Britain.
In 1720, the Villasur expedition from Santa Fe met and attempted to parley with French- allied Pawnee in what is now Nebraska.
The War of Jenkin's Ear broke out in 1739 between the Spanish and British and was confined to the Caribbean and Georgia.
Following the French and Indian War/Seven Years' War, the British troops invaded and captured the Spanish cities of Havana in Cuba and Manila in the Philippines in 1762.
The 21 northern missions in present-day California (U.S.) were established along California's El Camino Real from 1769.
Spain entered the American Revolutionary War as an ally of France in June 1779, a renewal of the Bourbon Family Compact.
In the second Treaty of Paris (1783), which ended the American Revolution, Britain ceded its two Florida colonies back to Spain to regain the Bahamas, which Spain had been occupying during the war.
In 1789, at Santa Cruz de Nuca, a conflict occurred between the Spanish naval officer Esteban José Martínez and the British merchant James Colnett, triggering the Nootka Crisis, which grew into an international incident and the threat of war between Britain and Spain.
During the era of the conquest, in order to pay off the debts incurred by the conquistadors and their companies, the new Spanish governors awarded their men grants of native tribute and labor, known as encomiendas.
In Peru, the other discovery that perpetuated the system of forced labor, the mit'a, was the enormously rich single silver mine discovered at Potosí, but in New Spain, labor recruitment differed significantly.
The Viceroyalty of New Spain was the principal source of income for Spain in the eighteenth century, with the revival of mining under the Bourbon Reforms.
The fast red dye cochineal was an important export in areas such as central Mexico and Oaxaca in terms of revenues to the crown and stimulation of the internal market of New Spain.
There were two major ports in New Spain, Veracruz the viceroyalty's principal port on the Atlantic, and Acapulco on the Pacific, terminus of the Manila Galleon.
These were ships that made voyages from the Philippines to Mexico, whose goods were then transported overland from Acapulco to Veracruz and later reshipped from Veracruz to Cádiz in Spain.
The Kingdom of New Spain was established following the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire in 1521 as a New World kingdom dependent on the Spanish Crown, since the initial funds for exploration came from Queen Isabella [REF].
The Viceroyalty of New Spain was established in 1535 in the Kingdom of New Spain.
The Spanish Empire comprised the territories in the north overseas 'Septentrion', from North America and the Caribbean, to the Philippine, Mariana and Caroline Islands [REF].
To the west of the continent, New Spain also included the Spanish East Indies (the Philippine Islands, the Mariana Islands, the Caroline Islands, parts of Taiwan, and parts of the Moluccas).
Until the 18th century, when Spain saw its claims in North America threatened by other European powers, much of what were called the Spanish borderlands consisted of territory now part of the United States.
The Caribbean islands and early Spanish explorations around the circum-Caribbean region had until 1521 not been of major political, strategic, or financial importance until the conquest of the Aztec Empire.
The crown had set up the Casa de Contratación (House of Trade) in 1503 to regulate contacts between Spain and its overseas possessions.
The crown under Philip II sought systematic information about his overseas empire and mandated reports, known as the Relaciones geográficas, with text on topography, economic conditions, populations among other information.
The crown created first mainland high court or Audiencia in 1527 to regain control of the administration of New Spain from Cortés, who as the premier conqueror of the Aztec empire, was ruling in the name of the king but without crown oversight or control.
After the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire in 1532 opened up the vast territories of South America to further conquests, the Crown established an independent Viceroyalty of Peru there in 1540.
Because the Roman Catholic Church had played such an important role in the Reconquista (Christian reconquest) of the Iberian peninsula from the Moors, the Church in essence became another arm of the Spanish government.
The conquistadors brought with them many missionaries to promulgate the Catholic religion.
At first, conversion seemed to be happening rapidly.
Many clerics, such as Bartolomé de las Casas, also tried to protect the natives from de facto and actual enslavement to the settlers, and obtained from the Crown decrees and promises to protect native Mesoamericans, most notably the New Laws.
The Spanish Inquisition, and its New Spanish counterpart, the Mexican Inquisition, continued to operate in the viceroyalty until Mexico declared its independence.
Even before the establishment of the viceroyalty of New Spain, conquerors in central Mexico founded new Spanish cities and embarked on further conquests, a pattern that had been established in the Caribbean [REF].
During the 16th century, many Spanish cities were established in North and Central America.
Upon his arrival, Viceroy Don Antonio de Mendoza vigorously took to the duties entrusted to him by the King and encouraged the exploration of Spain's new mainland territories.
The establishment of religious missions and military presidios on the northern frontier became the nucleus of Spanish settlement and the founding of Spanish towns.
Seeking to develop trade between the East Indies and the Americas across the Pacific Ocean, Miguel López de Legazpi established the first Spanish settlement in the Philippine Islands in 1565, which became the town of San Miguel (present-day Cebu City).
Products brought from Asia were sent to Acapulco then overland to Veracruz, and then shipped to Spain aboard the West Indies Fleets.
The Spanish crown created a system of convoys of ships (called the flota) to prevent attacks by European privateers.
Don Lope Díez de Armendáriz, born in Quito, Ecuador, was the first Viceroy of New Spain who was born in the 'New World'.
After the conquest of central Mexico, there were only two major Indian revolts challenging Spanish rule.
In the southern area of New Spain, the Tzeltal Maya and other indigenous groups, including the Tzotzil and Chol revolted in 1712.
In the colonial period, basic patterns of regional development emerged and strengthened[REF] European settlement and institutional life was built on the Mesoamerican heartland of the Aztec Empire in Central Mexico.
Regional characteristics of colonial Mexico have been the focus of considerable scholarship within the vast scholarship on centers and peripheries [REF].
The center of the Central region was Mexico City.
The areas from the capital east to the port of Veracruz saw significant regional development along this main transportation route.
In the late eighteenth century the crown devoted some resources to the study and remedy the problem of poor roads.
Although the crown's plans for both the Toluca and Veracruz portions of the king's highway were ambitious, the actual results saw improvements only for a localized network [REF].
Veracruz was the first Spanish settlement founded in what became New Spain, but it endured as the only viable Gulf Coast port, the enduring gateway for Spain to New Spain.
The Caribbean port of Veracruz was small, with its hot, pestilential climate not a draw for permanent settlers.
European diseases immediately affected the multiethnic Indian populations in the Veracruz area and for that reason Spaniards imported black slaves as either an alternative to indigenous labor or its complete replacement in the event of a repetition of the Caribbean die-off.
Indians resisted cultivating sugarcane themselves, preferring to tend their subsistence crops.
In 1765 the crown created a monopoly on tobacco, which directly affected agriculture and manufacturing the Veracruz region.
In 1787 during the Bourbon Reforms Veracruz became an intendancy, a new administrative unit.
Founded in 1531 as a Spanish settlement, Puebla de los Angeles quickly rose to the status of Mexico's second-most important city.
It became the seat of the richest diocese in New Spain in its first century, with the seat of the first diocese, formerly in Tlaxcala, moved there in 1543 [REF].
The foundation of the town of Puebla was a pragmatic social experiment to settle Spanish immigrants without encomiendas to pursue farming and industry [REF].
Administratively Puebla was far enough away from Mexico City (approximately ) so as not to be under its direct influence.
Puebla built a significant manufacturing sector, mainly in textile production in workshops (obrajes), supplying New Spain and markets as far away as Guatemala and Peru.
In 1787, Puebla became an intendancy as part of the new administrative structuring of the Bourbon Reforms.
Mexico City dominated the Valley of Mexico, but the valley continued to have dense indigenous populations challenged by growing, increasingly dense Spanish settlement.
The capital was provisioned by the indigenous towns and its labor was available for enterprises that ultimately created a colonial economy.
Texcoco in the pre-conquest period had been one of the three members of the Aztec Triple Alliance and the cultural center of the empire fell on hard times in the colonial period as an economic backwater.
Tlaxcala, the major ally of the Spanish against the Aztecs of Tenochtitlan, also became something of a backwater, but like Puebla it did not come under the control of Spanish encomenderos.
Since portions of northern New Spain became part of the United States' Southwest region, there has been considerable scholarship on the Spanish borderlands in the north.
The region farther north of the main mining zones attracted few Spanish settlers.
The Bajío, a rich, fertile lowland just north of central Mexico, was nonetheless a frontier region between the densely populated plateaus and valleys of Mexico's center and south and the harsh northern desert controlled by nomadic Chichimeca.
The discovery of mining deposits in Zacatecas and Guanajuato in the mid-sixteenth century and later in San Luis Potosí stimulated the Bajío's development to supply the mines with food and livestock.
In the late colonial period, renting complemented estate employment for many non-Indians in more central areas of the Bajío with access to markets.
Many renters retained ties to the estates, diversifying their household's sources of income and level of economic security.
Areas of northern Mexico were incorporated into the United States in the mid-nineteenth century, following Texas independence and the Mexican-American War (1846-48) and generally known as the "Spanish Borderlands" [REF].
The Presidios (forts), pueblos (civilian towns) and the misiones (missions) were the three major agencies employed by the Spanish crown to extend its borders and consolidate its colonial holdings in these territories.
The town of Albuquerque (present day Albuquerque, New Mexico) was founded in 1706.
During the term of viceroy Don Luis de Velasco, marqués de Salinas the crown ended the long-running Chichimeca War by making peace with the semi-nomadic Chichimeca indigenous tribes of northern México in 1591.
By naming the region "New Mexico", the Spanish likely hoped to incorporate a region as rich as Mexico had proven to be.
In 1610, Pedro de Peralta, a later governor of the Province of New Mexico, established the settlement of Santa Fe near the southern end of the Sangre de Cristo mountain range.
Not until the eighteenth century was California of much interest to the Spanish crown, since it had no known rich mineral deposits or indigenous populations sufficiently organized to render tribute and do labor for Spaniards.
By the middle of the 1700s, the Catholic order of Jesuits had established a number of missions on the Baja (lower) California peninsula.
In 1776, the north-western frontier areas came under the administration of the new 'Commandancy General of the Internal Provinces of the North' (Provincias Internas), designed to streamline administration and invigorate growth.
Once missions and protective presidios were established in an area, large land grants encouraged settlement and establishment of California ranchos.
Rancho activities centered on cattle-raising; many grantees emulated the Dons of Spain, with cattle, horses and sheep the source of wealth.
After the Mexican War of Independence (1821) and subsequent secularization ("disestablishment") of the missions (1834), Mexican land grant transactions increased the spread of the rancho system.
The Yucatán peninsula can be seen as a cul-de-sac,[REF] and it does indeed have unique features, but it also has strong similarities to other areas in the South.
With dense indigenous Maya populations, Yucatán's encomienda system was established early and persisted far longer than in central Mexico, since fewer Spaniards migrated to the region than in the center [REF].
In Yucatán Spanish rule was largely indirect, allowing these communities considerable political and cultural autonomy.
A limiting factor in Yucatán's economy was the poorness of the limestone soil, which could only support crops for two to three years with land cleared through slash and burn (swidden) agriculture.
In the seventeenth century, patterns shifted in Yucatán and Tabasco, as the English took territory the Spanish claimed but did not control, especially what became British Honduras (now Belize), where they cut dyewood and in Laguna de Términos (Isla del Carmen) where they cut logwood.
Since Oaxaca was lacking in mineral deposits and it had an abundant sedentary indigenous population, its development was notable for the lack of European or mixed-race population, lack of large-scale Spanish haciendas, and the survival of indigenous communities.
The most important commodity for Oaxaca was cochineal red dye.
Although the repartimiento has historically been seen as an imposition on the indigenous, forcing them into economic relations they would rather have avoided and maintained by force,[REF] recent work on eighteenth-century Oaxaca analyzes the nexus of crown officials (the alcaldes mayores) and Spanish merchants, and indigenous via the repartimiento.
The Isthmus of Tehuantepec region of Oaxaca was important for its short transit between the Gulf Coast and the Pacific, facilitating both overland and sea trade.
Gold mining was an early draw for Spaniards, who directed indigenous labor to its extraction, but did not continue beyond the mid-sixteenth century.
The Villa of Tehuantepec, the largest settlement on the isthmus, was an important prehispanic Zapotec trade and religious center, which was not under the jurisdiction of the Aztecs [REF].
The Cortés haciendas in Tehuantepec were key components of the province's economy, and they were directly linked to other Marquesado enterprises in greater Mexico in an integrated fashion [REF].
The most detailed economic records for the region are of the Marquesado's ranching haciendas, which produced draft animals (horses, mules, burros, and oxen) and sheep and goats, for meat and wool.
Although colonial population decline affected the indigenous in Tehuantepec, their communities remained important in the colonial era and remain distinctly Indian to the current era.
Under Spanish rule, the Zapotecs not only survived, but flourished, unlike the other two.
Not well documented is the number of African slaves and their descendants, who were artisans in urban areas and did hard manual labor in rural areas [REF].
In general, Tehuantepec was not a site of major historical events, but in 1660-61 there was a significant rebellion stemming from increased repartimiento Spanish demands [REF].
The Bourbon monarchy embarked upon a far-reaching program to revitalize the economy of its territories, both on the peninsula and its overseas possessions, to enhance administrative efficiency and crown control, and to decrease the power and privilege of the Roman Catholic Church vis-a-vis the state [REF].
The British capture and occupation of both Manila and Havana in 1762 during the global conflict of the Seven Years' War meant that the Spanish crown had to rethink its military strategy for defending its possessions.
The crown sought reliable information about New Spain and dispatched José de Gálvez as Visitador General (inspector general), who observed conditions needing reform, starting in 1765, in order to strengthen crown control over the kingdom [REF].
An important feature of the Bourbon Reforms was that they ended the significant amount of local control that was a characteristic of the bureaucracy under the Habsburgs, especially through the sale of offices.
In 1766, the crown appointed Carlos Francisco de Croix, marqués de Croix as viceroy of New Spain.
Another activist viceroy carrying out reforms was Antonio María de Bucareli y Ursúa, marqués de Valleheroso y conde de Jerena, who served from 1771 to 1779, and died in office.
The Spanish Bourbons monarchs' prime innovation introduction of intendancies, an institution emulating that of Bourbon France.
The focus on the economy (and the revenues it provided to the royal coffers) was also extended to society at large.
The crown sent a series of scientific expeditions to its overseas possessions, including the Royal Botanical Expedition to New Spain, led by Martín de Sessé and José Mariano Mociño (1787-1808) [REF].
The Bourbon Reforms were not a unified or entirely coherent program, but a series of crown initiatives designed to revitalize the economies of its overseas possessions and make administration more efficient and firmly under control of the crown.
Notable people from Stafford include the 17th century author of The Compleat Angler, Izaak Walton, whose cottage at nearby Shallowford is now an angling museum, and the 18th century playwright Richard Brinsley Sheridan was once the local MP.
In the early 1900s, the village of Great Haywood near Stafford was home to the wife of famous The Lord of the Rings author J. R. R. Tolkien.
British poet, playwright and freelance writer Carol Ann Duffy, although born in Glasgow, Scotland, grew up in Stafford and attended Stafford Girls' High School.
Richard Stanford (MP) (1382-1402) politician, MP for Stafford in May 1382, 1386, September 1388, 1391, 1399 and 1402.
James Trubshaw (1777 in Colwich - 1853) English builder, architect and civil engineer .
James Whitaker Wright (1846 - 1904) company promoter and swindler, who committed suicide at the Royal Courts of Justice in London immediately following his conviction for fraud.
Frank Houghton (1894-1972) Anglican missionary bishop and author .
Richard Barnfield (1574 in Norbury - 1620) poet, obscure and close relationship with William Shakespeare interests scholars.
John Prescott Knight RA (1803 in Stafford - 1881) English portrait painter.
Paul Pickard [REF] a former prize winning photojournalist, now an advertising photographer, was born in the town and attended King Edward VI Grammar School.
Walter Robins (1906 - 1968) cricketer and footballer.
Phil Robinson (footballer, born 1967) International Youth Scouting and Recruitment Manager at Manchester City.
Joe Leach (born 1990) English cricketer.
Nicholas "Nick" Jon Yelloly (born 1990 in Stafford) British auto racing driver.
(see also Baron Stafford) for details of a title that has been created several times in the Peerage of England .
William Howard, 1st Viscount Stafford, FRS (1614 - 1680) youngest son of Thomas Howard, 21st Earl of Arundel He was a Royalist supporter before being falsely implicated by Titus Oates in the later discredited "Popish Plot", and executed for treason.
Francis Fitzherbert, 15th Baron Stafford DL (born 1954) English landowner and peer, sat in the House of Lords from 1986 until its reform in 2000.
The town's main hospital is County Hospital It provides a wide range of non-specialist medical and surgical services.
St George's Hospital, part of the South Staffordshire and Shropshire Health Care Trust, is actually a combination of two historical hospitals-the Kingsmead Hospital (previously an elderly care facility) and the St George's psychiatric hospital.
The town is supplied with primary healthcare by the South Staffordshire Primary Care Trust [REF].
Policing in Stafford is provided by Staffordshire Police, which is headquartered on Weston Road.
Stafford Crown Court and Stafford County Court share a building in the town centre.
Stafford Prison is a Category C men's prison, operated by HM Prison Service.
Statutory emergency fire and rescue service is provided by the Staffordshire Fire and Rescue Service, which has stations in Beaconside and Rising Brook.
Staffordshire County Council's headquarters are in the centre of Stafford.
The town's main library was formerly in the Shire Hall, it has been relocated to part of the ground floor at 1 Staffordshire Place[REF] with smaller libraries in Rising Brook, Baswich and Holmcroft.
MoD Stafford is located on Beaconside.
The original settlement was on dry sand and gravel peninsula that provided a strategic crossing point in the marshy valley of the River Sow, a tributary of the River Trent.
It is thought Stafford was founded in about 700 AD[REF] by a Mercian prince called Bertelin who, according to legend, established a hermitage on the peninsula named Betheney or Bethnei [REF].
She and her younger brother King Edward the Elder of Wessex, both children of King Alfred the Great and Ealhswith, wife of Æthelred, ealdorman of the Angles of Mercia, were attempting to complete their father King Alfred the Great's programme of unifying England into a single kingdom.
The Lady of Mercia, Æthelflæd, ruled Mercia for five years after the death of her father and husband, dying in Tamworth in 918.
At around this time the county of Staffordshire was formed.
In 1069, a rebellion by Eadric the Wild against the Norman conquest culminated in the Battle of Stafford.
Stafford Castle was built by the Normans on the nearby hilltop to the west in about 1090.
Redevelopment began in the late 12th century, and while the church, the main north-to-south street (Greengate) and routes through the late Saxon industrial quarter to the east remained, in other ways the town plan changed.
In 1206 King John granted a Royal Charter which created the borough of Stafford.
King Richard II was paraded through the town's streets as a prisoner in 1399, by troops loyal to Henry Bolingbroke (the future Henry IV).
When James I visited Stafford, he was said to be so impressed by the town's Shire Hall and other buildings that he called it 'Little London' [REF].
Charles I visited Stafford shortly after the out-break of the English Civil War.
In 1658 Stafford elected John Bradshaw, the man who judged the trial of King Charles I, to represent the town in Parliament.
The town was represented in Parliament by the famous playwright Richard Brinsley Sheridan in the 18th century.
In 1837 the Grand Junction Railway built the first railway line (part of the line from Birmingham to Warrington) and railway station in the town; at Warrington this linked, via another line, with the Liverpool-to-Manchester railway.
On 31 March 2006 the Queen visited the town to join in the 800th anniversary civic celebrations.
In 2013 Stafford celebrated its 1,100th anniversary year with a number of history-based exhibitions, while local historian Nick Thomas and writer Roger Butters were set to produce the two-volume 'A Compleat History of Stafford' (sic).
Stafford is home to three association football clubs; Stafford Rangers F.C., Brocton F.C. and Stafford Town F.C., none of which play at a fully professional level.
The town also has two rugby union clubs[REF] though again they do not play at a high level.
There is also a local hockey team[REF] with eight adult teams.
Stafford Post Office Rifle and Pistol Club is a Home Office Approved Rifle Club founded in 1956[REF] and has its own 25yd indoor range attached to the Stafford Post Office Social Club.
Stafford Cricket and Hockey Club was founded in 1864, which almost certainly makes it the oldest sports club in Stafford.
In 1999 they were awarded a £200K lottery grant towards a new pavilion completed in 2000.
The cricket section always welcome new players of all abilities[REF] There are four senior sides that play on a Saturday.
Stafford has a long history of shoe making.
In 1875, A locomotive firm called W. G. Bagnall was set up.
Since 1903, a major activity in the town has been heavy electrical engineering, particularly producing power station transformers.
Perkins Engines has a factory making diesel engines in Littleworth.
The public sector provides a lot of local employment, with Staffordshire County Council, Stafford Borough Council and Staffordshire Police all headquartered in the town.
The town was home to the computer science and IT campus of Staffordshire University along with Beaconside campus which used to house the Faculty of Computing Engineering and Technology and part Business School this has all closed down and all have been transferred to Stoke-on-Trent.
The town centre Guildhall Shopping Centre is the town's main shopping venue, housing more than 40 retail outlets such as Boots, Topman Topshop and River Island.
Stafford railway station was once a major hub on the railway network, but the suspension of passenger services on the Stafford to Uttoxeter line in 1939 and Beeching's closure of the Stafford to Shrewsbury Line in 1964 completely halted east-west traffic through Stafford.
Junctions 13 (Stafford South & Central) and 14 (Stafford North) of the M6 motorway provide access to the town, therefore the major cities of Birmingham and Manchester and beyond are easily reached.
The majority of bus services in Stafford and area are provided by Arriva Midlands, and the company also operates services to Lichfield, Cannock and Wolverhampton.
The Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal runs close to the Baswich and Wildwood areas, and was previously linked to the River Sow by the River Sow Navigation.
The Chetwynd Centre also provides higher education in the town.
Stafford College is a large college of further education.
South Staffordshire College has a base in the village of Rodbaston, on the edge of Stafford.
Staffordshire University has a large campus in the east of the town and focuses heavily on computing, engineering and media technologies (film, music and computer games).
Stafford FM is Stafford's first and only FM radio station, and won their FM licence in 2015.
Stafford is covered by the Express and Star and Staffordshire Newsletter,[REF] both of which have offices in the town.
Stafford is covered by Midlands Today and ITV Central, both broadcasting from Birmingham.
In terms of BBC Local Radio, Stafford is covered by BBC Radio Stoke, which broadcasts to the town on 104.1 FM, with a transmitter based on top of the County Education building [REF].
Stafford can also get marginal signals from the West Midlands regionals, like Heart and Planet Rock, and is at the very north of Free Radio's Black Country and Shropshire coverage area.
Stafford FM first aired on 28 October 2001 from studios situated in Gaol Mews, Stafford, and has been broadcasting continually online since August 2013.
Windmill Broadcasting is an online community radio station broadcasting from the Broad Eye Windmill.
In October 2014, it was announced by Ofcom that forces station the British Forces Broadcasting Service will broadcast to the Beacon Barracks on FM, in addition to its sister station, BFBS Gurkha Radio, which already broadcasts locally on 1278 kHz medium wave.
The Elizabethan Ancient High House in the town centre is the largest timber-framed town house in England [REF].
Stafford Castle was built by the Normans on the nearby hilltop to the west in about 1090, replacing the post-Conquest fort in the town.
The oldest building now in Stafford is St Chad's Church, dating back into the 12th century [REF].
St Mary's, the collegiate church formerly linked to St Bertelin's chapel, was completely rebuilt in the early 13th century in a cruciform layout with an aisled nave and chancel typical of the period.
The Shire Hall Gallery was built in 1798 as a court house and office of the Mayor and Clerk of Stafford [REF].
The Shugborough Hall country estate is 4mi outside town.
Stafford Gatehouse Theatre is the town's main entertainment and cultural venue.
The three screen Apollo Cinema, showing mainstream releases, is in the centre of town.
Nightlife in the town consists of smaller bar and club venues such as Casa, the Grapes, the Picture House, and the nightclub Couture / Noir et Blanc, most of which are in walking distance of each other.
Five women were awarded their pilots' wings in a graduation ceremony with the Israeli air force
South Korea's Navy appointed its first two female officers to command fast attack craft [REF].
Florence Green, who was the last known living World War One veteran, died [REF].
The first Saudi Arabian women have been recruited into the country's military service, Arab News reports.
It was announced that the Australian Defence Force would open all jobs in the military to women in 2013 [REF].
Carmen Melendez de Maniglia became the first female admiral in Venezuela.
Col. Tammy Harris became the commander of CFB Borden near Barrie, Ontario.
Colonel Marian C. Aledio became the first female Judge Advocate General in the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) [REF].
A group of Chinese female pilots made their first solo flights in the J-10 combat aircraft, becoming the first female air force pilots capable of flying the multirole aircraft - the country's most advanced fighter jet [REF].
Rear Adm. Robin Braun became the first female commander of the U.S. Navy Reserve, and the first woman to lead any Reserve component of the U.S. military [REF].
Lance-Corporal Jacinda Baker, 26, became New Zealand's first female soldier killed in the war in Afghanistan, and in fact New Zealand's first female soldier killed since the Vietnam War [REF].
Sherry-Ann Edwards became the first female fleet chief petty officer in the Trinidad and Tobago Coast Guard [REF].
A British soldier, a Fijian national serving as a gunner with the Royal Artillery, gave birth to a boy while serving in Afghanistan.
Leading Hand Claire Butler, 29, from Middlesbrough, was named the first crew member on the largest warship built for the Royal Navy, the aircraft carrier HMS Queen Elizabeth.
For the first time ever, the Indian Air Force is preparing two of its women pilots for combat roles.
Zoe Briant-Evans, a Royal Navy Officer from Penzance, became the first woman appointed to the post of First Lieutenant at Britannia Royal Naval College (BRNC) in Dartmouth [REF].
Mona Abdo became Israel's first female Arab combat commander [REF].
Zubaida al-Meeki became the first female officer to quit President Bashar al-Assad's forces to join the Free Syrian Army [REF].
Lieutenant Commander Kay Burbidge became the first woman in the Fleet Air Arm to have 3000 flying hours [REF].
Lt. Nilofor Rhmani became the first female pilot in the Afghanistan air force to fly solo under the air force's pilot training program [REF].
Channing Day, a British servicewoman, became the first woman killed by friendly fire in Afghanistan [REF].
Commander Sandra Walker became the first woman to take command of a major tanker in New Zealand.
Dalva Maria Carvalho Mendes became the first female two-star rear admiral in the Brazilian Navy [REF].
Australia made a parliamentary apology to mainly female victims of sexual and physical abuse in the military and set up a compensation fund after thousands of claims of rape and sexual assault.
The Royal Australian Navy appointed Capt.
An anonymous woman became the first Orthodox Jewish female combat navigator in Israel [REF].
Shikha Awasthi, a cadet of the Armed Forces Medical College (AFMC) at Pune, India, becomes the first woman to receive a Sword of Honour for overall excellence at the passing-out parade of the institute.
An anonymous woman becomes the first to undertake combat missions in the RAF's new Typhoon fighter [REF].
Ramona Go is the Philippine army's first female general [REF].
Captain Lisa Head is the first British female officer to be killed in Afghanistan [REF].
Ramatoulie DK Sanneh is the first female Brigadier General in Gambia [REF].
Rear-Admiral Jennifer Bennett is appointed as the first female Chief, Reserves and Cadets, in Canada [REF].
Orna Barbivay becomes the first female Major General in the Israel Defense Forces [REF].
Sarah West was appointed as the first female warship commander in the Royal Navy of the British Armed Forces [REF].
Second Lieutenant Noy, a combat soldier in the Caracal Battalion, became the first female officer to command a sniper platoon in the Israel Defense Forces [REF].
A 30-year-old RAF officer (Flight Lieutenant Rachael Cadman) became the first woman to complete the Enduroman Arch2Arc Challenge [REF].
Warrant Officer Class One Esther Freeborn became the first female Bandmaster in the 350-year history of the Household Cavalry in England [REF].
The first female pilots joined the Botswana Defence Force [REF].
Proscovia Nalweyiso became the first female Brigadier General in Uganda [REF].
Australia decided to gradually remove all restrictions on women serving in front-line combat over a period of five years [REF].
Sapper Shanti Tigga became the first female jawan in the Indian army [REF].
The first all-female team of skydivers of the Indian Air Force made its official debut during the annual Air Force Day parade [REF].
Brigadier Simone Wilkie became the first woman to be in command of Australian soldiers at war.
Chantelle Taylor became the first female British soldier to reveal she killed an enemy fighter while on active combat, which she did in 2008 and revealed in 2011 [REF].
Blessing Liman became the first female pilot in the Nigerian Air Force [REF].
The first woman joined the ranks of the Mexican navy's special forces [REF].
Defence Secretary Philip Hammond confirmed that women are to be allowed to serve on the submarines of the Royal Navy (the naval warfare service branch of the British Armed Forces).
Robyn Walker became the first woman in the Royal Australian Navy to attain the rank of Rear Admiral, and also the first woman in the Australian Defence Force to take on the job of Surgeon-General [REF].
Lieutenant Commander Kay Burbidge became the first female senior observer in the Royal Navy [REF].
The Skype scandal in the Australian military occurred when footage of a young male recruit having sex with a female classmate was streamed online to cadets in another room without her knowledge [REF].
Divya Ajith Kumar becomes the first woman in the history of the Indian Army to receive the Sword of Honour, which is the highest award given to a cadet of the Officers Training Academy [REF].
The Afghanistan army gets its first female officers [REF].
Itunu Hotonu becomes the first Nigerian woman to be promoted to the rank of rear admiral by the Nigerian Navy [REF].
Lieutenant Alexandra Hansen was made the first female commanding officer of a ship (the HMNZS Pukaki) in the Royal New Zealand Navy [REF].
Flt Lt Kirsty Moore became the first female aviator for the Royal Air Force's Red Arrows, the RAF's aerobatic team [REF].
Lance Corporal Katrina Hodge becomes Miss England 2009 [REF].
Karen Soria became the first female rabbi in the Canadian Forces; she was assigned to 3 Canadian Forces Flying Training School in Portage la Prairie, Manitoba [REF].
In December 2006 female cadets from the Pakistan Military Academy for the first time assumed guard duties at the mausoleum of Quaid-e-Azam at Karachi [REF].
In this year women were enrolled in the Pakistani military for assignments other than duties in medical setups/units for the first time in history [REF].
Bombardier Allison Jones became the first woman to fire the One O'Clock Gun at Edinburgh Castle [REF].
Proscovia Nalweyiso became the first female Major-General in the Uganda People's Defence Forces (UPDF)
Norway announced its first-ever appointment of a woman (Tonje Skinnarland) to head its air force [REF].
A ban on female army officers in Turkey wearing the Muslim headscarf was lifted by the government.
While conscription has not been abolished in the Netherlands, compulsory attendance has.
Sweden instituted a military draft for both men and women [REF].
Julie-Anne Wood became the first female Maritime & Coastguard Agency's Head of Maritime Operations in Her Majesty's Coastguard [REF].
The president of India announced that women will be allowed to occupy combat roles in all sections of India's army, navy and air force [REF].
The Bangladesh army deployed a contingent under the lead of a female officer (Nazma Begum) for the first time ever in the UN peacekeeping mission in Ivory Coast [REF].
Taher al-Gharabli, head of the military council of the western Libyan city of Sabratha, confirmed for the first time that the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant was using women in combat roles [REF].
Constance Ama Emefa Edjeani-Afenu became the Ghana Armed Forces' first female brigadier general [REF].
Trooper Sara Spokes joined the 12th/16th Hunter River Lancers as the first female cavalry scout in the Australian armoured corps [REF].
The Royal Thai Air Force started recruiting female pilots for the first time in its history, and Suwattana Chanthalert became the first woman to apply for a job as a pilot in the Royal Thai Air Force [REF].
On May 30, 2016 Bangladesh Navy got its first batch of female sailors [REF].
Miho Otani became Japan's first female captain of a destroyer [REF].
Queen Elizabeth II became the longest serving Captain-General of the Honourable Artillery Company, with 64 years of service [REF].
Jennie Carignan became Canada's first female combat officer to rise to the rank of general [REF].
India's first women fighter pilots - Bhawana Kanth, Avani Chatuvedi and Mohana Singh - were commissioned in the Indian Air Force [REF].
Maureen O'Brien became the first female to be promoted to the rank of Colonel with the Irish Defence Forces [REF].
A ban on women serving in close combat roles in the British military was lifted by Prime Minister David Cameron [REF].
Turkey appointed Esra Özatay as its first female air force wing commander
A transgender woman who was a soldier in the British army, Chloe Allen, became the first female to serve on the British army frontline [REF].
Karyn Thompson became the first female commander at Waiouru Military Camp, which makes her the first such at any New Zealand army camp [REF].
Male Israeli soldiers can request not to serve alongside women and to be excused from any military event that goes against their beliefs, according to a directive published in 2016.
Albania's Defense Ministry stated that Manushaqe Shehu was named a brigade general, which makes her the first female army general in Albania [REF].
Indian Merchant Navy Captain Radhika Menon became the first woman to receive the International Maritime Organisation Award for Exceptional Bravery at Sea [REF].
The Republic of Korea Army (RoKA) announced on 5 December that it had appointed its first ever female helicopter pilot instructor, Jung Eun-hee [REF].
Chief Petty Officer, 1st Class Jan Davis is appointed Coxswain of HMCS Regina and is the first woman Coxswain of a major warship in Canada [REF].
Major D., an IAF MANAT (Flight Test Center) test-engineer flew the F-16I Sufa on Tuesday (27 April 2004).
Russia's first all-girls military school, Moscow Girls Cadet Boarding School No. 9, opened in 2004 [REF].
On 29 January, the first recruit batch of female soldiers passed out after one year training in Bangladesh Army [REF].
Wing Commander Nikki Thomas took charge of the newly reformed No. 12 Squadron RAF at RAF Marham in Norfolk, thus becoming the first woman to command an RAF fast jet squadron [REF].
Wing Commander Pooja Thakur became the first woman to lead the ceremonial Guard of Honour at Rashtrapathi Bhavan [REF].
For the first time, all-women contingents of air force, army, and navy personnel marched in India's Republic Day parade [REF].
Danielle Welch, the first woman to become a Royal Navy "ab-initio" Lynx helicopter pilot ("ab-initio" meaning she trained from start to finish on the same aircraft) received her wings from Prince Andrew [REF].
The Botswana Defence Force recruited its first female privates [REF].
North Korea is making military service mandatory for young women in a bid to strengthen the nation's armed forces, sources inside North Korea told DailyNK.
A German woman became the first female Westerner to die fighting ISIS after she was killed alongside Kurdish forces in a battle for the Syrian town Tal Tamr, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported [REF].
Gina Reque Terán was officially promoted to general, thus becoming Bolivia's first female army general [REF].
Gina Reque Terán became the first woman in Bolivia's history to assume the post of chief of the Armed Forces High Command
Indian Navy Dornier crashed during a night sortie, and Lieutenant Kiran Shekhawat was among those who died there, making her the first female Indian officer to die in the line of duty [REF].
North Korea introduced its first pair of female pilots of supersonic fighters, Jo Kum-hyang and Rim Sol, during a flight drill attended by leader Kim Jong-un, state media reported [REF].
Gan Siow Huang became the first female general officer in the Singapore Armed Forces with her promotion to Brigadier-General [REF].
The defence secretary stated that for the first time in British Army history a woman was in command of an operational brigade; specifically, Brigadier Sharon Nesmith was in command of the 1st United Kingdom Signal Brigade [REF].
Carla Higgins was appointed the first female commanding officer of the Faslane Patrol Boat Squadron, which is in Britain [REF].
The British Army appointed Susan Ridge as its first female general [REF].
Fatumah Ahmed became the first female Brigadier of the Kenya Defence Forces [REF].
Marise Payne became Australia's first female defense minister [REF].
Lieutenant Ouma Laouali became Niger's first female pilot
Mariam Mukhtar became Pakistan's first female fighter pilot to die in the line of duty [REF].
The Bolivian Air Force's first military pilot completed her solo-flight in August 2015 [REF].
The Royal Military Academy Sandhurst appointed Lucy Giles as the first female college commander in its history [REF].
The Air Force of Zimbabwe promoted Ellen Chiweshe to Air Commodore, the third highest rank in Zimbabwe's air force; this made her the first female Air Commodore in the Air Force of Zimbabwe and its highest ranking woman [REF].
Lee Hyun-ok was promoted to major general, which was the first time a female ethnic Korean became a general officer in the Chinese People's Liberation Army [REF].
Leading Seaman Hayley John and Leading Seaman Marketa Semik are the first female clearance divers in Canada [REF].
Master Seaman Colleen Beattie is the first woman in Canada qualified as a submariner, followed shortly by Master Seaman Carey Ann Stewart [REF].
The first all-female Canadian military team to complete the Nijmegen March in the Netherlands carrying the same weight as male teams do so in 2003.
Julie Hammer, RAAF, is promoted to Air Vice-Marshal.
Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace brings about the end of the Second Liberian Civil War.
The Israel Defense Forces appointed Major Oshrat Bacher as Israel's first female combat battalion commander [REF].
Dr. Shani became the first female combat doctor in an elite counterterror unit in the Israel Defense Forces (specifically, the Duvdevan counterterrorism unit.)
The Israel Defense Forces announced the appointment of Or Cohen as their first female Navy captain [REF].
Sri Lanka's military admitted its soldiers had abused and tortured women recruits [REF].
Myanmar's military appointed its first women representatives to parliament; the two, Lieutenant-Colonel Soe Soe Myint and Lieutenant-Colonel San Thida, were sworn into the lower house of parliament in 2014 [REF].
Antonette Wemyss-Gorman became the first female commanding officer in the Jamaica Defence Force's Coast Guard [REF].
South Korean female soldiers will be able to apply to all combat roles in the Army starting this year, as part of the military's efforts to integrate more women into closed units, the defense ministry said.
The German Navy appointed Janine Asseln as its first female submarine officer [REF].
Members of the Pershore and District branch of the Royal British Legion appointed Lt Col Susan Payne as the branch's first female president [REF].
French Defense Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian presented a report on the problem of sexual assault and sexual harassment in the French military and announced the French military's first effort to fix it [REF].
French Defense Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian announced that three women would join a nuclear submarine crew by 2017, which would be a first for France [REF].
Maxine Stiles, Alexandra Olsson, and Penny Thackray became the first female submariners in the Royal Navy of the United Kingdom [REF].
The Chinese People's Liberation Army used women soldiers as honor guards during a diplomatic ceremony for the first time [REF].
Over the weekend of May 24-25, women in the villages of Attagara and Kawuri in Borno state, Nigeria disarmed 10 Boko Haram insurgents who tried to attack their communities, and lynched four of the attackers [REF].
Mariam Hassan Salem al-Mansouri became the first Emirati woman to hold the rank of fighter pilot in the United Arab Emirates Air Force [REF].
Major General Kristin Lund, from Norway, became the first woman appointed to command a United Nations peacekeeping force [REF].
Algeria appointed three women army Generals, making it the Arab country with the biggest number of high-ranking female army commanders at the time [REF].
A group of South Korean former comfort women, who were forced to work in state-controlled brothels for the U.S. military after the 1950-53 Korean War, filed a lawsuit demanding compensation from the authorities for forced prostitution [REF].
The Women's League of Burma put out a statement citing the harassment of Chin women activists by authorities for their involvement in protests calling for greater women's rights and an end to sexual violence in Burma as evidence that the Burma Army protects rapists that belong to it [REF].
Third Warrant Officer Shirley Ng became the first female Red Lion parachutist to jump at the National Day Parade in Singapore [REF].
The Israel Defense Forces Artillery Corps opened its elite unit to female soldiers for the first time.
For the first time in more than half a century, a class of women military cadets graduated from Burma's Defense Services Academy [REF].
The Nicaraguan government announced the first woman, Miriam del Socorro Morales, to reach the level of colonel in Nicaragua [REF].
It is reported that about 1/3 of the members of Syrian Kurdish People's Protection Units (YPG), guerrilla offshoots of the Democratic Union Party who fight the Islamic State (IS), are women (Women's Protection Units) [REF].
During the 2014 Israel-Gaza conflict about 50 Israeli women served inside Gaza, which was the highest number during an Israeli conflict [REF].
Two female soldiers in the South Korean army, Staff Sgt.
Colonel Leena Gaurav of the Indian Army's Judge Advocate General's (JAG) branch became the first female officer in India to attain the Colonel rank in a branch of service other than the Army Medical Corps [REF].
A Canadian-born immigrant to Israel, Gill Rosenberg, became the first foreign woman to join Kurds battling the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant [REF].
For the first time in India's history, a special squad of women troops was deployed deep inside jungles to undertake active and prolonged operations against Naxalites [REF].
Tamanna-E-Lutfy became the first female pilot to fly solo in Bangladesh Air Force
Flight Lieutenant Nayma Haque and Flying Officer Tamanna-E-Lutfi, both officers of Bangladesh Air Force, became the first female combat pilots of Bangladesh [REF].
In July 2014, Deepika Misra became the first woman pilot ever to join a formation display team in India, when she joined the Indian Air Force's helicopter display team Sarang [REF].
Hsieh Shu-chen became Taiwan's first female Army ranger [REF].
Bangladesh Army opened its door for women for joining as ordinary soldiers [REF].
The Syrian government started recruiting female soldiers to perform security checks on veiled women [REF].
The Australian military opened up combat jobs to women in January 2013 [REF].
In an address to her people, a Russian woman appeared in a video announcing her decision of joining the Free Syrian Army [REF].
The first female Afghan National Army noncommissioned officers graduated from Regional Military Training Center-West [REF].
Captain Jannatul Ferdous became Bangladesh's first female paratrooper [REF].
Amira al-Aarour became the first Syrian woman to hold a leading post in the Free Syrian Army [REF].
An all-female battalion was armed by the Syrian government to back the rule of Bashar Al Assad [REF].
In Syria, Women's Protection Units, the first all-female battalion of Kurdish women was created [REF].
Eva Lizet Julca Anaya, a 23-year-old native of Peru, became the first foreign female cadet in the history of the Korea Military Academy [REF].
Taiwan decided to cancel the 8 percent limit for women serving in its military, as part of efforts to recruit more female soldiers [REF].
Allison Jones, from Coatbridge, North Lanarkshire, became the first woman appointed to fire the Edinburgh's One o'clock Gun at Edinburgh Castle [REF].
The Chinese army's first female special warfare unit was officially established in a brigade of the Nanjing Military Region [REF].
The Maritime Self-Defense Force of Japan named its first female skippers for destroyers used in training exercises; they were Miho Otani and Ryoko Azuma, who were the first female graduates of the National Defense Academy of Japan [REF].
Capt. Lee Na-kyum and Capt.
Brigadier Dianne Gallasch was named as the first female commandant of the Royal Military College, Duntroon, in the institution's 102-year history [REF].
The first female special operation company of the Army of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLAA) carried out the first parachute landing training in an area of North China on May 14, 2013.
Nilofar Rahmani, the first female pilot of Afghanistan to be trained inside the country earned her flying wing in May after graduating from Undergraduate Pilot Training [REF].
Armenia's Defense Ministry announced that, for the first time, women could be students at the nation's military schools [REF].
Norway's parliament voted to conscript women into its armed forces, thus making Norway the first European and first NATO country to make military service compulsory for both genders [REF].
16 female students passed the final evaluation to become fighter-pilots and received their bachelor's degrees at a graduation ceremony in Shijiazhuang Aviation College in North China's Hebei province on June 25, 2013, thus becoming China's first female fighter-pilots [REF].
The first female commanding officer of a helicopter squadron at RAF Shawbury, Becky Frater, started work.
On July 5, Venezuelan president Nicolás Maduro promoted Carmen Melendez to admiral-in-chief rank and appointed her as the first female minister of defense in the history of Venezuela [REF].
Sergeant Sophie Hobson, 35, who is based at RAF Brize Norton, became the first female ground engineer (GE) to work on the Hercules aircraft [REF].
Deann Davis became the first female ship rider from the Royal Bahamas Defence Force (RBDF) to accompany a ship with the U.S. Coast Guard [REF].
Pakistan's first group of female paratroopers completed their training [REF].
Lieutenant Colonel Bobeth O'Garro was confirmed as the Commandant for the Cayman Islands Cadet Corps, thus becoming the first female Commandant to lead a Corps in the Caribbean region [REF].
The Royal Air Force appointed Elaine West as its first ever woman to hold the position of Air Vice-Marshal, and the U.K. military said it would encourage women to aim for high-ranking careers [REF].
For the first time in Myanmar's history, the Ministry of Defense invited women to join the army in jobs other than army nurse [REF].
In a first, a female IDF [Israel Defense Forces] soldier was called up to the Torah during a service on a military base [REF].
Private Elise Toft became the first Norwegian woman to be awarded a combat medal since World War II
Luzviminda Camacho became the first female Filipino officer to head a Philippine peacekeeping force [REF].
The Israeli Defense Forces announced they will, for the first time, allow a (MTF) transgender woman to serve in the army as a female soldier [REF].
Russian war correspondent Elena Milashina was given the International Women of Courage Award for her journalism in Chechnya [REF].
Kalamazoo is served by one daily newspaper, the Kalamazoo Gazette, which now prints three editions weekly as of early 2012.
The Public Media Network, located in downtown Kalamazoo, hosts media outlets including Charter cable channels 19, 20, 21, 22, and 95 where daily public access programs are produced and aired to the public.
Kalamazoo is part of the West Michigan television market, which also includes Grand Rapids and Battle Creek.
WIDR is the college student-run, commercial free radio station at Western Michigan University.
WMUK is also on Western Michigan University's campus.
WKDS is West Michigan's only high school student-run radio station.
Radio stations from Battle Creek, Grand Rapids and Lansing are also heard in Kalamazoo.
Kalamazoo is home to Western Michigan University.
Each May, WMU hosts the International Congress on Medieval Studies.
Kalamazoo College, a private liberal arts college founded in 1833 is located on a hill opposite WMU's original campus.
Kalamazoo is home to Kalamazoo Valley Community College, Davenport University, and Kalamazoo Area Mathematics and Science Center (KAMSC).
The public schools are managed by Kalamazoo Public Schools.
Kalamazoo is served by highways I-94, US 131, M-43 and M-96.
Kalamazoo has rail service provided by Amtrak, with the station located downtown and combined with a newly renovated bus terminal.
Kalamazoo also has a freight service provided by Grand Elk Railroad running north to Grand Rapids, Michigan and south to Elkhart, Indiana.
Bus service to and through the city is provided by Greyhound, Indian Trails and the Kalamazoo trolley.
Public bus services within the city are provided by Metro Transit.
On the southern end of the city is the Kalamazoo/Battle Creek International Airport (AZO), which offers flights on various airlines to hubs and leisure destinations.
The Kal-Haven Trail, heavily used by cyclists, runners, walkers, and snowmobilers, extends to downtown Kalamazoo.
The section east of the trailhead was opened in 2008 and extends to downtown Kalamazoo.
Kalamazoo has many local breweries and brewpubs that produce a variety of beer styles.
Perhaps the best-known is Bell's Brewery, established as the Kalamazoo Brewing Company in 1985 by Larry Bell [REF].
In 2015, Rupert's Brew House entered the Kalamazoo craft spirits market [REF].
The A.M. Todd Company, one of the lead producers of peppermint oil and other flavorings, is headquartered in Kalamazoo [REF].
Kalamazoo is also home to Kalsec, another flavorings company, which was founded by Paul H. Todd, Jr., Albert Todd's grandson and U.S. Representative in the 89th Congress.
Stryker Corporation is Kalamazoo-based and makes medical equipment [REF].
Kalamazoo Outdoor Gourmet designs and manufactures outdoor kitchen equipment [REF].
Fabri-Kal, a supplier of food service and other containers produced from thermoform plastic or plant-based materials (Greenware product line), has operated corporate headquarters in Kalamazoo since the 1960s [REF].
Parker Hannifin Aerospace's Hydraulic Systems Division (HSD) is located at 2220 Palmer Ave in Kalamazoo, MI.
The Upjohn Company was a pharmaceutical manufacturing firm founded in 1886 in Kalamazoo that is now part of the Pfizer Corporation.
Western Michigan University School of Medicine (WMed) is a collaboration involving Western Michigan University and Kalamazoo's two teaching hospitals, Borgess Health[REF] and Bronson Healthcare.
The global Research and Development organization of Zoetis, the world's largest producer of medicine and vaccinations for pets and livestock, is headquartered in downtown Kalamazoo [REF].
The city is also home to the Stryker Corporation, a surgical and medical devices manufacturer.
In 2014, Newell Rubbermaid established a global product design center in Kalamazoo, consolidating fifteen global design units at a single location within the Western Michigan University Business Technology and Research Park [REF].
The W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, a nonpartisan, not-for-profit research organization, has operated in Kalamazoo since its establishment in 1945.
The Fetzer Institute promotes and funds holistic solutions to everyday problems [REF].
The economic development organization Southwest Michigan First was established in Kalamazoo in 1999, with a focus on Community Capitalism [REF].
The Bank Street Winter Market is open Saturdays, December through May.
PNC Bank - Kalamazoo was formerly the corporate HQ of First of America Bank, which merged with National City Bank in 1997.
mophie, a smartphone accessory company, was kick-started in a Kalamazoo barn in 2006 (as mStation)[REF] .
The area on which the modern city of Kalamazoo stands was once home to Native Americans of the Hopewell culture, who migrated into the area sometime before the first millennium.
René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, passed just southeast of the present city of Kalamazoo in late March 1680.
During the War of 1812, the British established a smithy and a prison camp in the area [REF].
The 1821 Treaty of Chicago ceded the territory south of the Grand River to the United States federal government.
In 1829, Titus Bronson, originally from Connecticut, became the first white settler to build a cabin within the present city limits of Kalamazoo [REF].
Bronson, frequently described as "eccentric" and argumentative, was later run out of town.
The fertile farmlands attracted prosperous Yankee farmers who settled the surrounding area, and sent their sons to Kalamazoo to become businessmen, professionals and entrepreneurs who started numerous factories [REF].
In the 1940s, the city became the first to install curb cuts.
In 1959, the city created the Kalamazoo Mall, the first outdoor pedestrian shopping mall in the United States, by closing part of Burdick Street to auto traffic.
An F3 tornado struck downtown Kalamazoo on May 13, 1980, killing five and injuring 79 [REF].
On February 20, 2016, Kalamazoo became the site of a random series of shootings in which six people were killed [REF].
In the past, Kalamazoo was known for its production of windmills, mandolins, buggies, automobiles, cigars, stoves, paper, and paper products.
Kalamazoo was the original home of Gibson Guitar Corporation, which spawned the still-local Heritage Guitars.
Kalamazoo was once known as the "Paper City" because of the paper mills in and near the city.
Early in the 20th century, Kalamazoo was home to the brass era automobile company Barley.
Kalamazoo was also headquarters of the Checker Motors Company, the former manufacturer of the Checker Cab, which also stamped sheet metal parts for other auto manufacturers.
Most of Kalamazoo is on the southwest bank of a major bend in the Kalamazoo River, with a small portion, about , on the opposite bank.
According to the United States Census Bureau, Kalamazoo has a total area of , of which is land and is water [REF].
Kalamazoo's suburban population is located primarily to the south, in the city of Portage, and to the west in Oshtemo and Texas townships.
At least part of the municipal water supply for Kalamazoo is provided by the watershed contained within the Al Sabo Preserve[REF] in Texas Charter Township, Michigan, immediately southwest of Kalamazoo.
Another watershed, Kleinstuck Marsh,[REF] is popular with hikers and birdwatchers.
Kalamazoo government is administered under a Commission-Manager style of government.
In the November 3, 2009, and November 8, 2011, elections voters returned Hopewell as mayor and McKinney as vice-mayor.
The City Manager is the city's chief administrative officer.
The city has an Arts Council [REF].
On New Year's Eve, downtown Kalamazoo is the site of an annual New Year's Fest celebration.
Music groups and other performing artists perform at the downtown State Theatre, Western Michigan University's Miller Auditorium, and Wings Event Center.
The annual "Eccentric Day" at Bell's Eccentric Cafe celebrates the brewery's Eccentric Ale on the December Friday that marks the end of finals at Western Michigan University [REF].
There is no longer a zoo in Kalamazoo.
The Moped Army was founded in Kalamazoo in 1997.
Next to Milham Park is the Milham Park Golf Course [REF].
In 2002, the Kalamazoo Public Library was named "Library of the Year" by Library Journal [REF].
Kalamazoo's theaters and performing groups include the Kalamazoo Civic Players, New Vic Theatre, Farmer's Alley Theatre, Crawlspace Theatre Productions, and the Barn Theatre in nearby Augusta.
A project of Kalamazoo Valley Community College, The Kalamazoo Animation Festival International (KAFI) encourages and educates animation artists, promotes Kalamazoo's animation industry, and provides community entertainment [REF].
KAFI's first festival drew 235 submissions and nearly 1,000 attendees in 2002.
The city's most prominent art museum is the Kalamazoo Institute of Arts, whose collection has more than 3,600 works and a focus on 20th-century American art.
The Kalamazoo Valley Museum, established in 1881,[REF] is an American Association of Museums accredited museum operated by Kalamazoo Valley Community College.
Northeast of town, in Hickory Corners, is the Gilmore Car Museum, which includes cars used in Walt Disney movies.
The Kalamazoo Air Zoo, just south of town, has several dozen aircraft on display, from biplanes to jets.
The Gibson Guitar Corporation, founded in Kalamazoo in 1902, spurred local musicians to play a wide variety of styles, from classical and folk to modern rock (the company relocated to Nashville in 1984).
The local and indie music scene has produced pop stars such as RCA recording artists The Verve Pipe and Metal Blade recording artists Thought Industry.
The Kalamazoo Wings (aka K-Wings) minor-pro hockey team plays games in Wings Event Center and has played since 1974.
In 2016, the Kalamazoo FC, a National Premier Soccer League team [REF].
Hyames Field played host to the first two College World Series held in 1947 and 1948.
The Kalamazoo College Hornets and Kalamazoo Valley Community College Cougars also have several collegiate athletic teams.
Kalamazoo is the hometown of New York Yankees all-star shortstop Derek Jeter, Minnesota Vikings wide receiver Greg Jennings, and retired running back T.J. Duckett.
The United States Tennis Association Boys 18 and 16 National Tennis Championships are hosted every summer by Kalamazoo College.
The Kalamazoo Rugby Football Club, founded in 1988, competes in the Michigan Rugby Football Union [REF].
Since 2006, Wings Event Center has been the home of the Killamazoo Derby Darlins roller derby league teams.
The annual Kalamazoo Marathon, a USA Track & Field-certified and Boston Marathon-qualifying event, is part of a weekend of running and walking events [REF].
As of 2000 the median income for a household in the city was $31,189, and the median income for a family was $42,438.
As of the census[REF] of 2010, there were 74,262 people, 29,141 households, and 13,453 families residing in the city.
There were 29,141 households of which 25.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 26.1% were married couples living together, 15.6% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.5% had a male householder with no wife present, and 53.8% were non-families.
The median age in the city was 26.2 years.
Kalamazoo's name is a familiar reference in popular music, since its exotic sound makes it a "great word for a lyric" [REF].
Probably the most famous and first was (I've Got a Gal In) Kalamazoo" (1942) by the Glenn Miller band with Tex Beneke.
At least a dozen (and many more versions) of "Kalamazoo" songs have been recorded.
The "Kalamazoo" was one of several names of a railroad Handcar, and was produced by the Kalamazoo Manufacturing Company [REF].
Sophie's family in Magic in the Moonlight came from Kalamazoo, Michigan.
c. 530 BC - Microgale macpheei survived in Madagascar until about this time [REF].
c. 450 BC - Crocidura balsamifera survived in Egypt until about this time [REF].
c. 341 BC - Archaeoindris fontoynonti survived in Madagascar until about this time [REF].
c. 110 BC - Archaeolemur edwardsi survived in Madagascar until about this time [REF].
c. 100 BC - Syrian elephant becomes extinct due to overhunting for ivory.
c. 1900 BC - Antillothrix bernensis survived on Hispaniola until about this time [REF].
c. 1780 BC - The last known population of woolly mammoths on Wrangel Island died out, possibly due to a combination of climate change and hunting [REF].
c. 1562 BC - The rodent Elasmodontomys obliquus survived in Puerto Rico until about this time [REF].
c. 1380 BC - Acratocnus odontrigonus, formerly inhabiting Puerto Rico and Antigua, survived until about this time [REF].
c. 1300 BC - Thylogale christenseni survived in New Guinea until about this time [REF].
c. 8920 BC - Oreamnos harringtoni survived in Arizona until about this time [REF].
c. 8760 BC - The Columbian mammoth survived in South Dakota until about this time [REF].
c. 8735 BC - Hippidion saldiasi survived in Chile until about this time [REF].
c. 8420 BC - Camelops hesternus, Martes nobilis and Panthera leo atrox survived until about this time [REF].
c. 8280 BC - Cervalces scotti survived until about this time [REF].
c. 5620 BC - Antidorcas bondi survived in South Africa until about this time [REF].
c. 5370 BC - Megatherium americanum survived in Argentina until about this time [REF].
c. 5020 BC - The Sardinian giant deer Praemegaceros cazioti survived until about this time [REF].
c. 256 - Mesopropithecus globiceps survived in Madagascar until about this time [REF].
c. 450 - The turtle genus Meiolania survived until this time on New Caledonia [REF].
c. 537 - Hadropithecus stenognathus survived in Madagascar until about this time [REF].
c. 540 - Mesopropithecus pithecoides survived in Madagascar until about this time [REF].
c. 730 - Pachylemur insignis survived in Madagascar until about this time [REF].
c. 885 - Daubentonia robusta survived in Madagascar until about this time [REF].
c. 915 - Plesiorycteropus survived in Madagascar until about this time [REF].
c. 1000 - Extinction of four species of moa-nalo on the Hawaiian Islands.
c. 1320 - The lemur Megaladapis edwardsi survived in Madagascar until about this time [REF].
c. 1360 - Nesophontes survived in Cuba until around this time [REF].
c. 1440 - The lemur Palaeopropithecus ingens survived in Madagascar until about this time [REF].
The moas of New Zealand became extinct, probably due to hunting [REF].
c. 1500-1550 - The Waitaha penguin of South Island became extinct [REF].
New Zealand's Haast's eagle, a giant bird of prey, becomes extinct.
1627 - The last known aurochs died in Poland.
c. 1660 - The giant vampire bat survived in Argentina until about this time [REF].
1662 - The last definite sighting of a Mauritius dodo was made [REF].
The elephant bird Aepyornis maximus was last recorded around the end of the 17th century [REF].
1768 - Steller's sea cow became extinct due to overhunting for meat and leather [REF].
1773 - The Tahiti sandpiper died out after rats were introduced to its habitat in the Society Islands [REF].
1774 - The Sardinian pika became extinct due to invasive species (foxes, cats, etc.) that were introduced to Sardinia and Corsica.
1777 - The Society parakeet population dies out on the Society Islands after vessels released pests.
1788 - The Lord Howe swamphen, also known as the white gallinule, becomes extinct.
1800 - The last known bluebuck was shot, making the species the first African antelope to be hunted to extinction by European settlers [REF].
1825 - The mysterious starling died out.
1826 - The Mauritius blue pigeon becomes extinct due to excessive hunting.
1827 - The Tonga ground skink dies out from its only home in the Tongan Islands.
1852 - The last sighting of a great auk was made off the coast of Newfoundland.
1860 - The string tree from the island of St Helena becomes extinct because of habitat destruction.
1860 - The sea mink becomes extinct because of hunting for its fur.
1875 - The broad-faced potoroo was last recorded [REF].
1876 - The Falkland Islands wolf became extinct [REF].
1878 - Labrador duck declared extinct after last appearances in Long Island three years earlier.
c. 1879 - The last known Atlas bear, Africa's only native bear, is killed by hunters in Morocco.
1883 - The Quagga, a sub-species of the plains zebra, goes extinct.
1886 - The red alga known as Bennett's seaweed from Australia disappears because of the massive human activities.
1889 - The last Hokkaido wolf dies from poisoning campaign [REF].
1890 - The eastern hare-wallaby was last recorded [REF].
1896 - The eastern elk, a subspecies of elk in the US and Canada, dies out in Minnesota.
1902 - The last known specimens of the Rocky Mountain locust are collected near Brandon, Manitoba [REF].
1905 - The last known Honshū wolf of Japan dies in Nara Prefecture [REF].
1907 - The huia, a native bird of New Zealand and one of the few birds in which the sexes had differently-shaped beaks (the female's was longer and more down-curved), succumbs to hunting, habitat loss, and introduced predators.
1909 - The last known tarpan, a Polish wild horse, died in captivity [REF].
1910 - The Usambara annone from Tanzania no longer grows in the tropical forests.
1911 - The last Newfoundland wolf was shot [REF].
1914 - The last passenger pigeon, Martha, died in captivity at the Cincinnati Zoo.
1918 - The last Carolina parakeet died in captivity at the Cincinnati Zoo.
1924 - The California grizzly bear is sighted for the last time [REF].
1925 - The Kenai Peninsula wolf was driven to extinction [REF].
1930 - Darwin's rice rat was last recorded in the Galápagos Islands.
1932 - "Booming Ben", the last known heath hen was seen on Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts.
1933 - The cry pansy from Europe becomes extinct due to habitat loss and overcollection in the only place where it grew, France.
1934 - The indefatigable Galapagos mouse becomes extinct four years after Darwin's rice rat on the same island.
1935 - The desert rat-kangaroo was last recorded [REF].
1935 - The Mogollon mountain wolf and the Southern Rocky Mountains wolf were hunted to extinction [REF].
1936 - The last thylacine died in captivity.
1937 - The last known Bali tiger was shot.
1938 - Radula visiniaca, a liverwort native to Europe becomes extinct.
1939 - The toolache wallaby was last recorded [REF].
1940 - The Cascade mountain wolf was hunted to extinction [REF].
1942 - The Texas wolf was purposefully driven to extinction [REF].
1942 - The last confirmed sighting of the Barbary lion, although unconfirmed reports surfaced until 1970 [REF].
1952 - Last reliable report of the Caribbean monk seal.
1952 - The Bernard's wolf was hunted to extinction [REF].
1956 - The crescent nail-tail wallaby and imperial woodpecker were last recorded [REF].
1962 - The red-bellied gracile opossum was last recorded in Argentina [REF].
1964 - The Hawaii chaff flower of the Hawaiian islands becomes extinct because of habitat loss.
1965 - Last sighting of the turgid-blossom pearly mussel, an American mussel [REF].
1966 - The last Arabian ostrich died.
c. 1969 - The last Mexican grizzly bear is shot.
c. 1970 - The Caspian tiger becomes extinct.
1972 - The endemic to Jamaica Mason River myrtle becomes extinct.
1974 - The last known Japanese sea lion is captured off the coast of Rebun Island, Hokkaido [REF].
c. 1979 - Last sightings of the Javan tiger.
1981 - The Puhielelu hibiscadelphus becomes extinct.
1981 - Last sighting of the green-blossom pearlymussel, an American mussel.
1983 - Last unconfirmed spotting of the kouprey (Bos sauveli),[REF] last absolute confirmed spotting was in 1969/70 [REF].
1983-84 - The 24-rayed sunstar (Heliaster solaris), the Galapagos black-spotted damselfish and the Galapagos stringweed likely become extinct due to climate change [REF].
1985 - The gastric-brooding frog or platypus frog (Rheobatrachus silus) became extinct probably due to habitat destruction and disease.
1987 - The last Kaua'i 'ō'ō (Moho braccatus), a male, is recorded singing a mating call.
1989 - The golden toad of Costa Rica becomes extinct, perhaps because of climate change.
1990 - The dusky seaside sparrow was officially declared extinct in December 1990.
1994 - Saint Croix racer, a snake native to the Virgin Islands, declared extinct.
1994 - Levuana moth from Hawaii goes extinct.
1997 - The Hainan ormosia (a species of legume) which was native to China is no longer seen.
2000 - "Celia", the last Pyrenean ibex, was found dead on 6 January 2000.
2003 - The last individual from the St. Helena olive, which was grown in cultivation, dies off.
2006 - A technologically sophisticated survey of the Yangtze River failed to find specimens of the baiji dolphin, prompting scientists to declare it functionally extinct [REF].
2011 - The eastern cougar was declared extinct [REF].
2011 - The western black rhinoceros was declared extinct [REF].
2012 - The Japanese river otter (Lutra lutra whiteneyi) declared extinct by the country's Ministry of the Environment, after not being seen for more than 30 years.
2012 - "Lonesome George", the last known specimen of the Pinta Island tortoise, died on 24 June 2012 [REF].
2013 - The Cape Verde giant skink is declared extinct.
2013 - The Formosan clouded leopard, previously endemic to the island of Taiwan, is officially declared extinct [REF].
2013 - The Scioto madtom, a species of fish, is declared extinct.
2014 - Acalypha wilderi has been declared extinct.
2014 - The Bermuda saw-whet owl has been declared extinct.
2015 - The Eastern cougar was confirmed extinct [REF].
2016 - The Bramble Cay melomys was confirmed extinct [REF].
c. 2915 BC - The canid Dusicyon avus survived in Argentina until about this time [REF].
c. 2835 BC - The Balearic cave goat became extinct around this time [REF].
c. 2765 BC - The North African buffalo Pelorovis antiquus survived until about this time.
c. 2550 BC - The Bennu heron became extinct around this time, possibly due to degradation of its wetland habitat.
c. 2240 BC - The sloth Megalocnus rodens survived in Cuba until about this time [REF].
c. 4950 BC - Dactylopsila kambuaya and Petauroides ayamaruensis survived in New Guinea until about this time [REF].
c. 4866 BC - Irish elk survived in the Urals and western Siberia until this time [REF].
c. 4605 BC - The glyptodont Doedicurus clavicaudatus survived in Argentina until about this time [REF].
c. 9950 BC - Cuvieronius humboldti survived in Chile until about this time [REF].
c. 9910 BC - The long-nosed peccary survived in Ohio until about this time [REF].
c. 9740 BC - Hemiauchenia macrocephala survived until about this time [REF].
c. 9715 BC - Macrauchenia survived in Chile until about this time [REF].
c. 9680 BC - Euceratherium collinum survived in Utah until about this time [REF].
c. 9650 BC - Arctotherium tarijense survived in Uruguay until about this time [REF].
c. 9550 BC - Stock's pronghorn survived until about this time [REF].
c. 9530 BC - The short-faced bear survived in Ohio until about this time [REF].
c. 9400 BC - The Corsican and Sardinian canid Cynotherium sardous survived until about this time [REF].
c. 9390 BC - Eremotherium laurillardi survived in Brazil until about this time [REF].
c. 9380 BC - Equus conversidens survived in Alberta until about this time [REF].
c. 9220 BC - Capromeryx minor and Equus scotti survived until about this time [REF].
c. 9180 BC - Bison antiquus survived in Alberta until about this time [REF].
c. 9135 BC - Panthera onca mesembrina survived until about this time [REF].
c. 9110 BC - The flat-headed peccary survived in Ohio until about this time [REF].
c. 9090 BC - Glyptodon, Scelidotherium, Stegomastodon, and Toxodon survived in Brazil until about this time [REF].
c. 9080 BC - The pygmy mammoth survived on Santa Rosa Island, California until about this time [REF].
c. 9030 BC - Bootherium bombifrons survived in Alberta, Canada until about this time [REF].
c. 6960 BC - Scelidodon chiliensis survived in Peru until about this time [REF].
c. 6910 BC - The primitive bison survived in the Taymyr Peninsula until this time [REF].
c. 6730 BC - Equus santaelenae survived in Ecuador until about this time [REF].
c. 6720 BC - Ochotona whartoni survived in eastern North America until about this time [REF].
c. 6689 BC - Mylodon survived in Chile until about this time [REF].
c. 6050 BC - Megalotragus priscus survived in South Africa until about this time [REF].
c. 7950 BC - Nothrotheriops shastensis survived until about this time [REF].
c. 7930 BC - Glossotherium floridanum, Holmesina septentrionalis, Mammut americanum, Tapirus veroensis and Palaeolama mirifica survived until about this time [REF].
c. 7630 BC - The sloth Catonyx cuvieri survived in Brazil until about this time [REF].
c. 7600 BC - Castoroides ohioensis and Mylohyus nasutus survived until about this time [REF].
c. 7490 BC - Canis dirus and Megalonyx jeffersonii survived until about this time [REF].
c. 7470 BC - The Cyprus dwarf elephant became extinct around this time [REF].
c. 7460 BC - Smilodon fatalis survived until about this time [REF].
c. 7290 BC - The Cyprus dwarf hippopotamus became extinct at about this time [REF].
c. 7180 BC - Smilodon populator survived in Brazil until about this time [REF].
Due to its location in the eastern Pyrenees mountain range, Andorra consists predominantly of rugged mountains, the highest being the Coma Pedrosa at , and the average elevation of Andorra is [REF].
Phytogeographically, Andorra belongs to the Atlantic European province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom.
Andorra has an alpine climate and continental climate.
In Andorra, mobile and fixed telephone and internet services are operated exclusively by the Andorran national telecommunications company, SOM, also known as Andorra Telecom (STA).
By the end of 2010, it was planned that every home in the country would have fibre-to-the-home for internet access at a minimum speed of 100 Mbit/s,[REF] and the availability was complete in June 2012.
There is only one Andorran television station, Ràdio i Televisió d'Andorra (RTVA).
La Balma de la Margineda found by archaeologists at Sant Julia de Loria were the first temporal settled in 10000 BC as a passing place between the two sides of the Pyrenees.
During the Neolithic Age the group of humans moved to the Valley of Madriu (nowaday Natural Parc located in Escaldes-Engordany declared UNESCO World Heritage Site) as a permanent camp in 6640 BC.
Other archaeological deposits include the Tombs of Segudet (Ordino) and Feixa del Moro (Sant Julia de Loria) both dated in 4900-4300 BC as an example of the Urn culture in Andorra.
The sanctuary of Roc de les Bruixes (Stone of the Witches) is maybe the most important archeological complex of this Age in Andorra, located in the parish of Canillo, about the rituals of funerals, ancient scripture and engraved stone murals.
The inhabitants of the valleys were traditionally associated with the Iberians and historically located in Andorra as the Iberian tribe Andosins or Andosini (Ἀνδοσίνους) during the VII and II centuries BC.
Some of the most significant remains of this era are the Castle of the Roc d'Enclar (part of the early Marca Hispanica), l'Anxiu in Les Escaldes and Roc de L'Oral in Encamp.
After the fall of the Roman Empire Andorra was under the influence of the Visigoths, not directly from the Kingdom of Toledo by distance, but more particular from the Diocese of Urgell.
Tradition holds that Charles the Great (Charlemagne) granted a charter to the Andorran people, under the command of Marc Almugaver and an army of five thousand soldiers, in return for fighting against the Moors near Porté-Puymorens (Cerdanya) [REF].
Andorra remained part of the Marca Hispanica of the Frankish Empire being overlordship of the territory the Count of Urgell and eventually by the bishop of the Diocese of Urgell.
In 988, Borrell II, Count of Urgell, gave the Andorran valleys to the Diocese of Urgell in exchange for land in Cerdanya [REF].
The first document that mentions Andorra as a territory is the Acta de Consagració i Dotació de la Catedral de la Seu d'Urgell (Deed of Consecration and Endowment of the Cathedral of La Seu d'Urgell).
Before 1095, Andorra did not have any type of military protection and the Bishop of Urgell, who knew that the Count of Urgell wanted to reclaim the Andorran valleys,[REF] asked the Lord of Caboet for help and protection.
In the 13th century, a military dispute arose between the Bishop of Urgell and the Count of Foix as aftermath of the Cathar Crusade.
A second paréage was signed in 1288 after a dispute when the Count of Foix ordered the construction of a castle in Roc d'Enclar.
In 1364 the political organization of the country named the figure of the syndic (nowadays spokesman and president of the parliament) as representative of the Andorrans to their co-princes making possible the creation of local departments (comuns, quarts and veïnats).
While the Catalan Pyrenees were embryonic of the Catalan language at the end of the XI century Andorra was influenced by the appearance of that language where it was adopted by proximity and influence even decades before it was expanded by the rest of the Kingdom of Aragon [REF].
The local population based its economy during the Middle Ages in the livestock and agriculture, as well as in furs and weavers.
In 1601 the Tribunal de Corts (High Court of Justice) was created as a result of Huguenot rebellions from France, Inquisition courts coming from Spain and indigenous witchcraft experienced in the country due to the Reformation and Counter-Reformation.
Andorra continues with the same economic system that it had during the XII-XIV centuries with a large production of metallurgy (fargues, a system similar to Farga catalana) and with the introduction of tobacco circa 1692 and import trade.
Three centuries after its foundation the Consell de la Terra locates its headquarters and the Tribunal de Corts in Casa de la Vall in 1702.
In both Guerra dels Segadors and Guerra de Sucesión Española conflicts, the Andorran people (although with the statement neutral country) supported the Catalans who saw their rights reduced in 1716.
In 1812-13, the First French Empire annexed Catalonia and divided it in four départements, with Andorra being made part of the district of Puigcerdà (département of Sègre).
Andorra retained its medieval institutions and rural culture largely unchanged during this period.
Andorra declared war on Imperial Germany during World War I, but did not actually take part in the fighting.
In 1933, France occupied Andorra following social unrest which occurred before elections.
Given its relative isolation, Andorra has existed outside the mainstream of European history, with few ties to countries other than France, Spain and Portugal.
The population of Andorra is estimated at 85,458 (2014) [REF].
Two-thirds of residents lack Andorran nationality and do not have the right to vote in communal elections.
The historic and official language is Catalan, a Romance language.
Because of immigration, historical links, and close geographic proximity, Spanish, Portuguese and French are also commonly spoken.
The population of Andorra is predominantly (88.2%)
Tourism, the mainstay of Andorra's tiny, well-to-do economy, accounts for roughly 80% of GDP.
One of the main sources of income in Andorra is tourism from ski resorts which total over of ski ground.
The banking sector, with its tax haven status, also contributes substantially to the economy (the financial and insurance sector accounts for approximately 19% of GDP[REF]).
Agricultural production is limited-only 2% of the land is arable-and most food has to be imported.
Andorra is not a member of the European Union, but enjoys a special relationship with it, such as being treated as an EU member for trade in manufactured goods (no tariffs) and as a non-EU member for agricultural products.
Andorra has traditionally had one of the world's lowest unemployment rates.
Andorra has long benefited from its status as a tax haven, with revenues raised exclusively through import tariffs.
Children between the ages of 6 and 16 are required by law to have full-time education.
There are three systems of schools Andorran, French, and Spanish which use Catalan, French, and Spanish, respectively, as the main language of instruction.
The Universitat d'Andorra (UdA) is the state public university and is the only university in Andorra.
The geographical complexity of the country as well as the small number of students prevents the University of Andorra from developing a full academic programme, and it serves principally as a centre for virtual studies, connected to Spanish and French universities.
Andorra does not have its own armed forces,[REF] although there is a small ceremonial army.
Andorra has a small army, which has historically been raised or reconstituted at various dates, but has never in modern times amounted to a standing army.
Prior to World War I Andorra maintained an armed force of about 600 part-time militiamen.
In the modern era, the army has consisted of a very small body of volunteers willing to undertake ceremonial duties.
The army's role in internal security was largely taken over by the formation of the Police Corps of Andorra in 1931.
Today a small, twelve-man ceremonial unit remains the only permanent section of the Andorran Army, but all able-bodied men remain technically available for military service,[REF] with a requirement for each family to have access to a firearm.
The myth that all members of the Andorran Army are ranked as officers is popularly maintained in many works of reference [REF].
Andorra maintains a small but modern and well-equipped internal police force, with around 240 police officers supported by civilian assistants.
The Grup d'Intervenció Policia d'Andorra (GIPA) is a small special forces unit trained in counter-terrorism, and hostage recovery tasks.
The Andorran Fire Brigade, with headquarters at Santa Coloma, operates from four modern fire stations, and has a staff of around 120 firefighters.
Historically, the families of the six ancient parishes of Andorra maintained local arrangements to assist each other in fighting fires.
The fire service maintains full-time cover with five fire crews on duty at any time two at the brigade's headquarters in Santa Coloma, and one crew at each of the other three fire stations [REF].
The origin of the word Andorra is unknown, although several hypotheses have been formulated.
Another theory suggests that Andorra may derive from Arabic al-durra, meaning "The forest" (الدرة).
Other theories suggest that the term derives from the Navarro-Aragonese andurrial, which means "land covered with bushes" or "scrubland" [REF].
Andorra is a parliamentary co-principality with the President of France and the Bishop of Urgell (Catalonia, Spain) as Co-Princes.
The current Head of Government is Antoni Martí of the Democrats for Andorra (DA).
The Parliament of Andorra is known as the General Council.
Half are elected in equal numbers by each of the seven administrative parishes, and the other half of the Councillors are elected in a single national constituency.
Candidates can be proposed by a minimum of one-fifth of the Councillors.
The Council also approves the annual budget of the principality.
If the Head of Government is not satisfied with the Council, he may request that the Co-Princes dissolve the Council and order new elections.
Until the 20th century, Andorra had very limited transport links to the outside world, and development of the country was affected by its physical isolation.
Andorra has a road network of , of which is unpaved.
There are no airports for fixed-wing aircraft within Andorra's borders but there are, however, heliports in La Massana (Camí Heliport), Arinsal and Escaldes-Engordany with commercial helicopter services[REF][REF] and an airport located in the neighbouring Spanish comarca of Alt Urgell, south of the Andorran-Spanish border [REF].
Nearby airports located in Spain and France provide access to international flights for the principality.
The nearest railway station is L'Hospitalet-près-l'Andorre east of Andorra which is on the -gauge line from Latour-de-Carol, () southeast of Andorra, to Toulouse and on to Paris by the French high-speed trains.
Andorra is famous for the practice of Winter Sports.
In roller hockey Andorra usually plays in CERH Euro Cup and in FIRS Roller Hockey World Cup.
The country is represented in association football by the Andorra national football team.
Rugby is a traditional sport in Andorra, mainly influenced by the popularity in southern France.
Basketball popularity has increased in the country since the 1990s, when the Andorran team BC Andorra played in the top league of Spain (Liga ACB) [REF].
Other sports practised in Andorra include cycling, volleyball, judo, Australian Rules football, handball, swimming, gymnastics, tennis and motorsports.
Andorra first participated at the Olympic Games in 1976.
As part of the Catalan cultural ambit, Andorra is home to a team of castellers, or Catalan human tower builders.
Ariadna Tudel Cuberes and Sophie Dusautoir Bertrand earned the bronze medal in the women's team competition at the 2009 European Championship of Ski Mountaineering.
By 1510 the Uzbeks had completed their conquest of Central Asia, including the territory of the present-day Uzbekistan.
Near the end of the sixteenth century, the Uzbek states of Bukhoro and Khorazm began to weaken because of their endless wars against each other and the Persians and because of strong competition for the throne among the khans in power and their heirs.
Another factor contributing to the weakness of the Uzbek khanates in this period was the general decline of trade moving through the region.
The Uzbeks' struggle with Iran also led to the cultural isolation of Central Asia from the rest of the Islamic world.
The conquest of Central Asia by Muslim Arabs, which was completed in the eighth century AD, brought to the region a new religion that continues to be dominant.
Despite brief Arab rule, Central Asia successfully retained much of its Iranian characteristic, remaining an important center of culture and trade for centuries after the adoption of the new religion.
During the height of the Abbasid Caliphate in the eighth and the ninth centuries, Central Asia and Transoxiana experienced a truly golden age.
As the Abbasid Caliphate began to weaken and local Islamic Iranian states emerged as the rulers of Iran and Central Asia, the Persian language continued its preeminent role in the region as the language of literature and government.
The first people known to have occupied Central Asia were Iranian nomads who arrived from the northern grasslands of what is now Kazakhstan sometime in the first millennium BC.
Alexander the Great conquered the region in 328 BC, bringing it briefly under the control of his Macedonian Empire [REF].
The wealth of Transoxiana was a constant magnet for invasions from the northern steppes and from China.
In the same centuries, however, the region also was an important center of intellectual life and religion.
For the whole region see Russian conquest of Turkestan .
As soon as the Russian conquest of the Caucasus was completed in the late 1850s, therefore, the Russian Ministry of War began to send military forces against the Central Asian khanates.
During the first few decades of Russian rule, the daily life of the Central Asians did not change greatly.
In the last decade of the nineteenth century, conditions began to change as new Russian railroads brought greater numbers of Russians into the area.
Prior to the events of 1917, Russian rule had brought some industrial development in sectors directly connected with cotton.
During the decade following the death of Rashidov, Moscow attempted to regain the central control over Uzbekistan that had weakened in the previous decade.
In 1989 ethnic animosities came to a head in the Fergana Valley, where local Meskhetian Turks were assaulted by Uzbeks, and in the Kyrgyz city of Osh, where Uzbek and Kyrgyz youth clashed.
Resentment among Uzbeks continued to smolder, however, in the liberalized atmosphere of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's policies of perestroika and glasnost.
By the late 1980s, some dissenting intellectuals had formed political organizations to express their grievances.
Following the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953, the relative relaxation of totalitarian control initiated by First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev (in office 1953-64) brought the rehabilitation of some of the Uzbek nationalists who had been purged.
As Uzbeks were beginning to gain leading positions in society, they also were establishing or reviving unofficial networks based on regional and clan loyalties.
In this way, Rashidov was able to initiate efforts to make Uzbekistan less subservient to Moscow.
In the ninth century, the continued influx of nomads from the northern steppes brought a new group of people into Central Asia.
The first of the Turkic states in the region was the Persianate Ghaznavid Empire, established in the last years of the tenth century.
The dominance of Ghazna was curtailed, however, when the Seljuks led themselves into the western part of the region, conquering the Ghaznavid territory of Khorazm (also spelled Khorezm and Khwarazm) [REF].
In the late twelfth century, a Turkic leader of Khorazm, which is the region south of the Aral Sea, united Khorazm, Transoxiana, and Iran under his rule.
Russian influence was especially strong among certain young intellectuals who were the sons of the rich merchant classes.
The next opportunity for the Jadidists presented itself in 1917 with the outbreak of the February and October revolutions in Russia.
However, the majority of Jadidists, including leaders such as Abdurrauf Fitrat and Fayzulla Khodzhayev, cast their lot with the communists.
The Basmachi revolt eventually was crushed as the civil war in Russia ended and the communists drew away large portions of the Central Asian population with promises of local political autonomy and the potential economic autonomy of Soviet leader Lenin's New Economic Policy.
The attempted coup against the Gorbachev government by disaffected hard-liners in Moscow, which occurred in August 1991, was a catalyst for independence movements throughout the Soviet Union.
Although Uzbekistan had not sought independence, when events brought them to that point, Karimov and his government moved quickly to adapt themselves to the new realities.
The activities of missionaries from some Islamic countries, coupled with the absence of real opportunities to participate in public affairs, contributed to the popularization of a radical interpretation of Islam.
In March 2004, another wave of attacks shook the country.
President Karimov claimed the attacks were probably the work of a banned radical group Hizb ut-Tahrir ("The Party of Liberation"), although the group denied responsibility.
In 2004, British ambassador Craig Murray was removed from his post after speaking out against the regime's human rights abuses and British collusion therein [REF].
On July 30, 2004, terrorists bombed the embassies of Israel and the United States in Tashkent, killing three people and wounding several.
In May 2005, several hundred demonstrators were killed when Uzbek troops fired into a crowd protesting against the imprisonment of 23 local businessmen.
In July 2005, the Uzbek government gave the US 180 days' notice to leave the airbase it had leased in Uzbekistan.
In December 2007 Islam A. Karimov was reelected to power in a fraudulent election.
The lead up to the elections was characterized by the secret police arresting dozens of opposition activists and putting them in jail including Yusuf Djumayaev, an opposition poet.
In 2016, Karimov died, still being a president and was replaced by Shavkat Mirziyoyev.
Following the death of Genghis Khan in 1227, his empire was divided among his four sons and his family members.
In the early fourteenth century, however, as the empire began to break up into its constituent parts, the Chaghatai territory also was disrupted as the princes of various tribal groups competed for influence.
Timur initiated the last flowering of Mawarannahr by gathering in his capital, Samarqand, numerous artisans and scholars from the lands he had conquered.
The Timurid state quickly broke into two halves after the death of Timur.
Eastern Ontario has always been a highway or corridor through which people moved, a corridor used by migration and conquest.
Early settlement of the region is largely undocumented although oral histories and early accounts suggest that settlers, traders and farmers existed in the area long before formal recognition.
The post-contact regional population was a mixture of French Canadian, Ojibwe and Mohawk residents.
Smaller but nevertheless impressive contributions in the region were made by everyone from Jewish traders, craftsmen and merchants, Eastern European refugees and even former slaves.
The aftermath of the American Revolution resulted in the formal division of Upper and Lower Canada (later, Ontario and Quebec) to accommodate Loyalists fleeing persecution in the new United States, and distribution of land throughout Southern Ontario brought major change to Eastern Ontario.
"The original 516 settlers arrived in Royal Township #2 with minimal supplies and faced years of hard work and possible starvation.
For the next three years, bateaux (boat) crews delivered rations to the township, after which residents were left to fend for themselves."[REF] .
The region's spirit of enterprise and fortitude was well-known in the 19th century.
Recently, Cornwall has seen an increase in the arrival of new immigrants,[REF] who tend to integrate and fare better-off than immigrants in other parts of the country [REF].
Cornwall is a port-of-entry into Canada (Canada Border Services abandoned the Cornwall Island post May 31, 2009, but resumed service on July 13, 2009 at temporary facilities on the city's southern edge.)
Cornwall was once home to a thriving cotton processing industry.
Cornwall's industrial base has now shifted to a more diversified mix of manufacturing, automotive, high tech, food processing, distribution centres and call centres.
MoneySense magazine rated Cornwall as Canada's 167th best place to live (out of 190), in 2012 [REF].
Cornwall Square, also known as "The Square", is a two-level shopping mall within Cornwall [REF].
Aboriginal peoples have lived in and around the area of present-day Cornwall for millennia.
The first serious European settlement was established in 1784 by United Empire Loyalists primarily from New York.
They were led by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir John Johnson and were soldiers from the First Battalion King's Royal Regiment of New York and a contingent of the 84th Royal Highland Emigrants.
They founded a settlement on the site formerly called Pointe Maligne by French colonists and renamed it "Royal Settlement #2", and, later, "New Johnstown".
In 1846, the population was about 1,600 and there were many brick and stone houses as well as a stone court house and jail.
Canal and lock construction in the late 1800s and early 1900s brought work international business.
In 1944, the city was rocked by a magnitude 5.8 earthquake but however, there were no deaths and injuries reported but several chimneys were destroyed or damaged, along with heavy damage to masonry structures.
Situated west of Cornwall along the St. Lawrence River were several smaller communities.
The Cornwall City Council is governed by an elected eleven-member municipal government composed of a mayor and ten councillors who serve four-year terms and represent the City as a whole.
The Mayor of Cornwall is Leslie O'Shaughnessy, former reeve of the nearby Charlottenburg township.
At the 2010 municipal election, 56.5% of eligible voters did not vote as out of 30,655 registered voters, only 13,338 cast ballots (43.5%).
Cornwall is located within the Stormont-Dundas-South Glengarry riding.
Stormont-Dundas-South Glengarry is represented federally by MP Guy Lauzon (Conservative).
Cornwall Collegiate and Vocational School became a grade 7-12 school after amalgamating with General Vanier Intermediate School for the 2011-12 school year.
St. Joseph's Secondary School is a part of the Catholic District Board and offers French immersion education.
Saint Lawrence Secondary School hosts students from grade 7-12.
Al-rashid Islamic Institute is the first Islamic school of any kind in North America, providing higher educations Islamic studies with the boarding facility.
Census results from Statistics Canada[REF] indicate that 28.6% of adults (20 - 64 years) did not finish high school.
A campus of St. Lawrence College is situated in Cornwall.
Cornwall is home to the Canadian Forces School of Aerospace Control Operations (École des opérations de contrôle aérospatial des Forces canadiennes), also known as CFSACO [REF].
The Cornwall Tool Library is situated in Cornwall.
With a fleet of 24 buses, Cornwall Transit operates 6 days per week (excluding Sundays and holidays) on fixed routes and supplementary "rush-hour" routes.
At one time Cornwall had a street car system[REF] .
Cornwall is served by the Cornwall Regional Airport located east of the City near Summerstown.
Cornwall is located on CN Rail's mainline Quebec City-Windsor corridor and served by passenger intercity trains operated by Via Rail.
The City of Cornwall is on the St. Lawrence Seaway just east of the Eisenhower and Snell Locks.
Cornwall was unusually integrated for a town in Ontario.
The original Native population was remarkably welcoming, and the Iroquois were especially known for integrating newcomers into local societies and for adapting to change.
In the 1780s-1830s, a "Bee" was a social event that pooled local labour resources, and was often a festive occasion.
"In her book "Roughing It in the Bush", Susanna Moodie observed that "people in the woods, have a craze for giving and going to bees and run to them with as much eagerness as a peasant runs to a race."
"The harshness and isolation of frontier living prevented the development of an aristocracy and, instead, united all members of the community in a struggle for survival.
Some stations from other nearby areas, including Ottawa, Montreal and New York's North Country, are also available.
Le/The Journal de Cornwall is another weekly newspaper.
The Seeker is a locally owned weekly newspaper distributed both door to door and in stores which focuses on arts, culture and events.
In September 2008, over public opposition and in spite of Ontario Ministry of Environment (M.O.E.) reports indicating off-site leachate impact from the dump and the likelihood of runoff to the St. Lawrence River, the M.O.E.
Although the area is touted as recreational, it is off-limits until winter when the waste is covered and the odours are subdued.
For years, the industrial emissions in the Cornwall area fuelled public health concerns about respiratory disease and cancer.
The shutdown of the Courtaulds rayon fiber operation (1992) and the Domtar paper mill (2006) have been a significant factor in the City's improved air quality.
Cornwall was at one point one of only two cities left in the Province of Ontario with only primary sewage treatment facilities.
In 2006, the City updated its Strategic Plan, including the objective to develop an environmentally-sustainable community.
In 2007, a former city councillor, Naresh Bhargava, began working with the St. Lawrence River Institute of Environmental Sciences on a project called the Community Carbon Reduction Initiative.
Similar to most of southern Ontario, Cornwall has a humid continental climate (Köppen Dfa/Dfb) with cold, snowy winters and warm, humid summers.
The City of Cornwall hosts festivals and special community events including Canada Day festivities, and Kinsmen Cornwall Lift Off, an annual hot air balloon and music festival.
Cornwall is named after the County of Cornwall in the United Kingdom.
Lift Off was an annual music and hot air balloon festival that took place in July in Lamoureux park.
2014 was the final year for the Lift Off festival, as debt from a weather-plagued 2013 event and failure to obtain sponsors forced the cancellation of Lift-Off 2015 and resulted in a decision to discontinue to the festival [REF].
Lift Off was the only hot air balloon festival in Ontario.
Kinsmen Cornwall Lift Off promoted a variety of local and national talent.
The 2014 Lineup featured Great Big Sea's Alan Doyle, Glass Tiger and 54-40 as headliners [REF].
Cornwall Ribfest is an annual festival that is held by the Optimist Club of Cornwall [REF].
Cornwall has two indoor arenas, the Cornwall Civic Complex and the Benson Centre with three ice surfaces.
Cornwall has been home to a variety of sports teams, the most notable of which was the Cornwall Royals hockey team which played in both the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League and the Ontario Hockey League before moving to Newmarket in 1992.
Between the years 1993-1996, the Cornwall Aces, an AHL franchise, was in town.
The Cornwall Colts are the current Junior A team playing in the Central Canada Hockey League.
The Cornwall River Kings of the Ligue Nord-Américaine de Hockey (LNAH) started playing out of the Civic Complex in the fall of 2012 but folded in 2016.
Cornwall's competitive swim team is the Cornwall Sea Lions, currently under the coaching of Simon St. Pierre.
Cornwall has three soccer areas, The Kinsmen Junior Soccer Field at Second Street West and Haulage Road; The Benson Centre (for indoor soccer); and Optimist Park on Sunnyside Street and St. Michel Drive.
Cornwall has both competitive Men's and Women's Rugby Clubs.
The sport of rugby continues to grow in the community.
Roller Derby The Seaway Roller Derby Girls Association is the First Roller Derby Flat track roller derby league in Cornwall and SD&G Counties, established in 2011 by Penny Rudderham.
Girls' Basketball The United Counties Girls Basketball Team won provincial and international basketball tournaments in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Pinyin superseded older romanization systems such as Wade-Giles (1859; modified 1892) and postal romanization, and replaced zhuyin as the method of Chinese phonetic instruction in mainland China.
The spelling of Chinese geographical or personal names in pinyin has become the most common way to transcribe them in English.
Families outside of Taiwan who speak Mandarin as a mother tongue use pinyin to help children associate characters with spoken words which they already know.
Since 1958, pinyin has been actively used in adult education as well, making it easier for formerly illiterate people to continue with self-study after a short period of pinyin literacy instruction [REF].
Pinyin has become a tool for many foreigners to learn Mandarin pronunciation, and is used to explain both the grammar and spoken Mandarin coupled with Chinese characters ().
The tone-marking diacritics are commonly omitted in popular news stories and even in scholarly works.
The pinyin system also uses diacritics to mark the four tones of Mandarin.
The words are "mother", "hemp", "horse", "scold", and a question particle, respectively.
Before the advent of computers, many typewriter fonts did not contain vowels with macron or caron diacritics.
Briefly, the tone mark should always be placed by the order-a, o, e, i, u, ü, with the only exception being iu, where the tone mark is placed on the u instead.
When the nucleus is /ə/ (written e or o), and there is both a medial and a coda, the nucleus may be dropped from writing.
If there is an a or an e, it will take the tone mark.
If there is an ou, then the o takes the tone mark.
Otherwise, the second vowel takes the tone mark.
Otherwise, the vowels are -iu or -ui, in which case the second vowel takes the tone mark.
If the tone is written over an i, the tittle above the i is omitted, as in yī.
The placement of the tone marker, when more than one of the written letters a, e, i, o, and u appears, can also be inferred from the nature of the vowel sound in the medial and final.
Specifically, if the spelling of a diphthong begins with i (as in ia) or u (as in ua), which here serves as a near-semi-vowel, this letter does not take the tone marker.
In addition to tone number and mark, tone color has been suggested as a visual aid for learning.
Dummitt's color scheme was one of the first to be used.
In spoken Chinese, the third tone is often pronounced as a "half third tone", in which the pitch does not rise.
An umlaut is placed over the letter u when it occurs after the initials l and n in order to represent the sound [y].
However, the ü is not used in the other contexts where it could represent a front high rounded vowel, namely after the letters j, q, x, and y.
Many fonts or output methods do not support an umlaut for ü or cannot place tone marks on top of ü.
This also presents a problem in transcribing names for use on passports, affecting people with names that consist of the sound lü or nü, particularly people with the surname (Lǚ), a fairly common surname, particularly compared to the surname (Lù), (Lǔ), (Lú) and (Lù).
Although nüe written as nue, and lüe written as lue are not ambiguous, nue or lue are not correct according to the rules; nüe and lüe should be used instead.
Taiwan (Republic of China) adopted Tongyong Pinyin, a modification of Hanyu Pinyin, as the official romanization system on the national level between October 2002 and January 2009, when it switched to Hanyu Pinyin.
Tongyong Pinyin was made the official system in an administrative order that allowed its adoption by local governments to be voluntary.
The adoption of Hanyu Pinyin as the official romanization system in Taiwan does not preclude the official retention of earlier spellings.
Pinyin is now used by foreign students learning Chinese as a second language.
Pinyin assigns some Latin letters sound values which are quite different from that of most languages.
Because Pinyin is purely a representation of the sounds of Mandarin, it completely lacks the semantic cues and contexts inherent in Chinese characters.
Simple computer systems, able to display only 7-bit ASCII text (essentially the 26 Latin letters, 10 digits, and punctuation marks), long provided a convincing argument for using pinyin instead of Chinese characters.
Pinyin was created by Chinese linguists, including Zhou Youguang, as part of a Chinese government project in the 1950s.
A draft was published on February 12, 1956.
Beginning in the early 1980s, Western publications addressing Mainland China began using the Hanyu Pinyin romanization system instead of earlier romanization systems;[REF] this change followed the normalization of diplomatic relations between the United States and the PRC in 1979 [REF].
Most rules given here in terms of English pronunciation are approximations, as several of these sounds do not correspond directly to sounds in English.
The following is a list of finals in Standard Chinese, excepting most of those ending with r.
Change initial w to u and initial y to i.
For u after j, q, x, or y, look under ü.
In 1605, the Jesuit missionary Matteo Ricci published () in Beijing [REF].
One of the earliest Chinese thinkers to relate Western alphabets to Chinese was late Ming to early Qing Dynasty scholar-official, Fang Yizhi (; 1611-1671) [REF].
The first late Qing reformer to propose that China adopt a system of spelling was Song Shu (1862-1910).
The Wade-Giles system was produced by Thomas Wade in 1859, and further improved by Herbert Giles in the Chinese-English Dictionary of 1892.
In the early 1930s, Communist Party of China leaders trained in Moscow introduced a phonetic alphabet using Roman letters which had been developed in the Soviet Oriental Institute of Leningrad and was originally intended to improve literacy in the Russian Far East [REF].
In 1940, several thousand members attended a Border Region Sin Wenz Society convention.
In 1943, the U.S. military engaged Yale University to develop a romanization of Mandarin Chinese for its pilots flying over China.
When a foreign writing system with one set of coding/decoding system is taken to write a language, certain compromises may have to be made.
In this system, the correspondence between the Roman letter and the sound is sometimes idiosyncratic, though not necessarily more so than the way the Latin script is employed in other languages.
The pronunciation and spelling of Chinese words are generally given in terms of initials and finals, which represent the segmental phonemic portion of the language, rather than letter by letter.
Unlike European languages, clusters of letters - initials () and finals () - and not consonant and vowel letters, form the fundamental elements in pinyin (and most other phonetic systems used to describe the Han language).
Even though most initials contain a consonant, finals are not always simple vowels, especially in compound finals (), i.e. when a "medial" is placed in front of the final.
In each cell below, the first line indicates IPA, the second indicates pinyin for a standalone (no-initial) form, and the third indicates pinyin for a combination with an initial.
The only syllable-final consonants in Standard Chinese are -n and -ng, and -r, which is attached as a grammatical suffix.
Technically, i, u, ü without a following vowel are finals, not medials, and therefore take the tone marks, but they are more concisely displayed as above.
Syllables starting with u are written as w in place of u (e.g., *uan is written as wan).
Syllables starting with i are written as y in place of i (e.g., *ian is written as yan).
Syllables starting with ü are written as yu in place of ü (e.g., *üe is written as yue).
ü is written as u when there is no ambiguity (such as ju, qu, and xu), but written as ü when there are corresponding u syllables (such as lü and nü).
When preceded by a consonant, iou, uei, and uen are simplified as iu, ui, and un (which do not represent the actual pronunciation).
The apostrophe (') is used before a syllable starting with a vowel (a, o, or e) in a multiple-syllable word when the syllable does not start the word (which is most commonly realized as ), unless the syllable immediately follows a hyphen or other dash [REF].
Eh alone is written as ê
ng has the uncommon shorthand of ŋ.
Early drafts also contained the letter ɥ or ч, borrowed from the Cyrillic script, in place of later j [REF].
The letter v is unused (except in spelling foreign languages, languages of minority nationalities, and some dialects), despite a conscious effort to distribute letters more evenly than in Western languages.
Most of the above are used to avoid ambiguity when writing words of more than one syllable in pinyin.
Although Chinese characters represent single syllables, Mandarin Chinese is a polysyllabic language.
The first letter of each line in a poem is capitalized.
The hyphen is a half-width hyphen (-).
Ellipsis can be changed from 6 dots ( .. .. ) to 3 dots ( .. ).
The enumeration comma (、) is changed to a normal comma (,).
All other punctuation marks are the same as the ones used in normal texts.
In the aftermath of World War II, European colonies, controlling more than one billion people throughout the world, still ruled most of the Middle East, South East Asia, and the Indian Subcontinent.
The war, however, only accelerated forces already in existence undermining Western imperialism in Asia.
In India, the westward movement of Japanese forces towards Bengal during World War II had led to major concessions on the part of British authorities to Indian nationalist leaders.
Following the end of the war, nationalists in Indonesia demanded complete independence from the Netherlands.
The end of Dutch rule opened up latent tensions between the roughly 300 distinct ethnic groups of the islands, with the major ethnic fault line being between the Javanese and the non-Javanese.
Netherlands New Guinea was under the Dutch administration until 1962 (see also West New Guinea dispute).
In the Philippines, the U.S. remained committed to its previous pledges to grant the islands their independence, and the Philippines became the first of the Western-controlled Asian colonies to be granted independence post-World War II.
This aim was greatly complicated by the rise of new political forces.
In 1968, the PKP underwent a split, and in 1969 the Maoist faction of the PKP created the New People's Army.
France remained determined to retain its control of Indochina.
Meanwhile, in Vietnam, the French war against the Viet Minh continued for nearly eight years.
Qing China defeated Russia in the Sino-Russian border conflicts.
While the British were consolidating their hold on India, Russian expansion had moved steadily eastward to the Pacific, then toward the Middle East.
Anglo-Russian rivalry in the Middle East and Central Asia led to a brief confrontation over Afghanistan in the 1870s.
In 1907, the United Kingdom and Russia signed an agreement which - on the surface -ended their rivalry in Central Asia.
Following the entente, Russia increasingly intervened in Persian domestic politics and suppressed nationalist movements that threatened both St. Petersburg and London.
France, which had lost its empire to the British by the end of the 18th century, had little geographical or commercial basis for expansion in Southeast Asia.
French religious and commercial interests were established in Indochina as early as the 17th century, but no concerted effort at stabilizing the French position was possible in the face of British strength in the Indian Ocean and French defeat in Europe at the beginning of the 19th century.
By the Treaty of Saigon in 1862, on June 5, the Vietnamese emperor ceded France three provinces of southern Vietnam to form the French colony of Cochinchina; France also secured trade and religious privileges in the rest of Vietnam and a protectorate over Vietnam's foreign relations.
By the beginning of the 20th century, France had created an empire in Indochina nearly 50 percent larger than the mother country.
In 1641, all Westerners were thrown out of Japan.
Japan's freedom from Western penetration ended on 8 July 1853, when Commodore Matthew Perry of the U.S. Navy sailed a squadron of black-hulled warships into Edo (modern Tokyo) harbor.
The Meiji Restoration of 1868 led to administrative overhaul, deflation and subsequent rapid economic development.
Taiwan, ceded by Qing Dynasty China, became the first Japanese colony.
The Empire of Japan and the Joseon Dynasty in Korea formed bilateral diplomatic relations in 1876.
Japan was now one of the most powerful forces in the Far East, and in 1914, it entered World War I on the side of the Allies, seizing German-occupied Kiaochow and subsequently demanding Chinese acceptance of Japanese political influence and territorial acquisitions (Twenty-One Demands, 1915).
Tensions with China increased over the 1920s, and in 1931 Japanese army units based in Manchuria seized control of the region without direction from Tokyo.
The 16th century brought many Jesuit missionaries to China, such as Matteo Ricci, who established missions where Western science was introduced, and where Europeans gathered knowledge of Chinese society, history, culture, and science.
Early in the 19th century, serious internal weaknesses developed in the Qing dynasty that left China vulnerable to Western, Meiji period Japanese, and Russian imperialism.
Toward the end of the 19th century, China appeared on the way to territorial dismemberment and economic vassalage-the fate of India's rulers that played out much earlier.
The Qing dynasty forced Russia to hand over disputed territory in Ili in the Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1881), in what was widely seen by the west as a diplomatic victory for the Qing [REF].
The British observer Demetrius Charles de Kavanagh Boulger suggested a British-Chinese alliance to check Russian expansion in Central Asia.
The Russians observed the Chinese building up their arsenal of modern weapons during the Ili crisis, the Chinese bought thousands of rifles from Germany [REF].
Compared to Russian controlled areas, more benefits were given to the Muslim Kirghiz on the Chinese controlled areas.
Russian sinologists, the Russian media, threat of internal rebellion, the pariah status inflicted by the Congress of Berlin, the negative state of the Russian economy all led Russia to concede and negotiate with China in St Petersburg, and return most of Ili to China [REF].
The rise of Japan since the Meiji Restoration as an imperial power led to further subjugation of China.
China's defeat at the hands of Japan was another trigger for future aggressive actions by Western powers.
China continued to be divided up into these spheres until the United States, which had no sphere of influence, grew alarmed at the possibility of its businessmen being excluded from Chinese markets.
The erosion of Chinese sovereignty and seizures of land from Chinese by foreigners contributed to a spectacular anti-foreign outbreak in June 1900, when the "Boxers" (properly the society of the "righteous and harmonious fists") attacked foreigners around Beijing.
The correspondent Douglas Story observed Chinese troops in 1907 and praised their abilities and military skill [REF].
Extraterritorial jurisdiction was abandoned by the United Kingdom and the United States in 1943.
The English sought to stake out claims in India at the expense of the Portuguese dating back to the Elizabethan era.
Through bribes, diplomacy, and manipulation of weak native rulers, the company prospered in India, where it became the most powerful political force, and outrivaled its Portuguese and French competitors.
The British East India Company, although still in direct competition with French and Dutch interests until 1763, was able to extend its control over almost the whole of India in the century following the subjugation of Bengal at the 1757 Battle of Plassey.
The reign of Aurangzeb had marked the height of Mughal power, By 1690.
Until 1858, however, much of India was still officially the dominion of the Mughal emperor.
The 1857 Sepoy Rebellion, or Indian Mutiny, an uprising initiated by Indian troops, called sepoys, who formed the bulk of the Company's armed forces, was the key turning point.
The Company initiated the first of the Anglo-Burmese wars in 1824, which led to total annexation of Burma by the Crown in 1885.
The denial of equal status to Indians was the immediate stimulus for the formation in 1885 of the Indian National Congress, initially loyal to the Empire but committed from 1905 to increased self-government and by 1930 to outright independence.
Portuguese decline in Asia was accelerated by the attacks on their commercial empire by the Dutch and the English, which began a global struggle over empire in Asia that lasted until the end of the Seven Years' War in 1763.
By the 1590s, a number of Dutch companies were formed to finance trading expeditions in Asia.
In 1605, armed Dutch merchants captured the Portuguese fort at Amboyna in the Moluccas, which was developed into the first secure base of the company.
Dutch East India Company colonies or outposts were later established in Atjeh (Aceh), 1667; Macassar, 1669; and Bantam, 1682.
Ming dynasty China defeated the Dutch East India Company in the Sino-Dutch conflicts.
The Vietnamese Nguyễn lords defeated the Dutch in a naval battle in 1643.
The Cambodians defeated the Dutch in the Cambodian-Dutch War in 1644.
In 1652, Jan van Riebeeck established an outpost at the Cape of Good Hope (the southwestern tip of Africa, currently in South Africa) to restock company ships on their journey to East Asia.
By 1669, the Dutch East India Company was the richest private company in history, with a huge fleet of merchant ships and warships, tens of thousands of employees, a private army consisting of thousands of soldiers, and a reputation on the part of its stockholders for high dividend payments.
The company was in almost constant conflict with the English
Six years into formal colonisation of the East Indies, in Europe the Dutch Republic was occupied by the French forces of Napoleon.
After the defeat of Napoleon and the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814 colonial government of the East Indies was ceded back to the Dutch in 1817.
The Dutch concentrated their colonial enterprise in the Dutch East Indies (Indonesia) throughout the 19th century.
Some Americans advocated for the annexation of Taiwan from China [REF].
As the United States emerged as a new imperial power in the Pacific and Asia, one of the two oldest Western imperialist powers in the regions, Spain, was finding it increasingly difficult to maintain control of territories it had held in the regions since the 16th century.
As the U.S. continued to expand its economic and military power in the Pacific, it declared war against Spain in 1898.
The Filipinos, who assisted U.S. troops in fighting the Spanish, wished to establish an independent state and, on June 12, 1898, declared independence from Spain.
U.S. attacks into the countryside often included scorched earth campaigns where entire villages were burned and destroyed, and concentrated civilians into camps known as "protected zones."
The Moro Muslims fought against the Americans in the Moro Rebellion.
In 1914, Dean C. Worcester, U.S. Secretary of the Interior for the Philippines (1901-1913) described "the regime of civilisation and improvement which started with American occupation and resulted in developing naked savages into cultivated and educated men."
In 1509, the Portuguese under Francisco de Almeida won the decisive battle of Diu against a joint Mamluk and Arab fleet sent to expel the Portuguese of the Arabian Sea.
Early in the 16th century Afonso de Albuquerque (left) emerged as the Portuguese colonial viceroy most instrumental in consolidating Portugal's holdings in Africa and in Asia.
Lured by the potential of high profits from another expedition, the Portuguese established a permanent base in Cochin, south of the Indian trade port of Calicut in the early 16th century.
Portuguese viceroy Albuquerque (1509-1515) resolved to consolidate Portuguese holdings in Africa and Asia, and secure control of trade with the East Indies and China.
The Portuguese conquest of Malacca triggered the Malayan-Portuguese war.
In 1557, China decided to lease Macau to the Portuguese as a place where they could dry goods they transported on their ships, which they held until 1999.
In 1505 (also possibly before, in 1501), the Portuguese, through Lourenço de Almeida, the son of Francisco de Almeida, reached Ceylon.
The energies of Castile (later, the unified Spain), the other major colonial power of the 16th century, were largely concentrated on the Americas, not South and East Asia, but the Spanish did establish a footing in the Far East in the Philippines.
The lucrative trade was vastly expanded when the Portuguese began to export slaves from Africa in 1541; however, over time, the rise of the slave trade left Portugal over-extended, and vulnerable to competition from other Western European powers.
Rival European powers began to make inroads in Asia as the Portuguese and Spanish trade in the Indian Ocean declined primarily because they had become hugely over-stretched financially due to the limitations on their investment capacity and contemporary naval technology.
The existing Portuguese interests in Asia proved sufficient to finance further colonial expansion and entrenchment in areas regarded as of greater strategic importance in Africa and Brazil.
The arrival of the Portuguese and Spanish and their holy wars against Muslim states in the Malayan-Portuguese war, Spanish-Moro conflict and Castilian War inflamed religious tensions and turned Southeast Asia into an arena of conflict between Muslims and Christians.
The word "savages" in Spanish, cafres, was from the word "infidel" in Arabic - Kafir, and was used by the Spanish to refer to their own "christian savages" who were arrested in Brunei [REF].
In 1578 an attack was launched by the Spanish against Jolo, and in 1875 it was destroyed at their hands, and once again in 1974 it was destroyed by the Philippines [REF].
The Spanish war against Brunei failed to conquer Brunei but it totally cut off the Philippines from Brunei's influence, the Spanish then started colonizing Mindanao and building fortresses.
The Spanish were expelled from Brunei in 1579 after they attacked in 1578 [REF].
During first contact with China, numerous aggressions and provocations were undertaken by the Portuguese[REF][REF] They believed they could mistreat the non-Christians because they themselves were Christians and acted in the name of their religion in committing crimes and atrocities [REF].
European exploration of Asia started in ancient Roman times.
In the 13th and 14th centuries, a number of Europeans, many of them Christian missionaries, had sought to penetrate into China.
Western European rulers determined to find new trade routes of their own.
In 1488, Bartolomeu Dias rounded the southern tip of Africa under the sponsorship of Portugal's John II, from which point he noticed that the coast swung northeast (Cape of Good Hope).
Afghanistan - founded by the Anglo-Afghan Treaty of 1919 of the United Kingdom and declared independence in 1919.
China - Independent but had European spheres of influence.
Japan - was a Great power and had its own colonial empire (including Korea and Taiwan).
Korea - is independent state, Joseon Dynasty control Korea territory until Japanese Empire annexed and conquered Korea in 1905.
Turkey - succession to the Ottoman Empire in 1923, the Ottoman Empire itself could be considered a colonial empire.
Historically, Kharkiv lies in the Sloboda Ukraine region (Slobozhanshchyna also known as Slobidshchyna) in Ukraine, in which it is considered as a main city.
Based on Kharkiv's topography, the city can be conditionally divided on the four lower districts and the four higher districts.
The highest point over the sea level in Pyatikhatky in Kharkiv is 202m, the lowest point over the sea level in Novoselivka in Kharkiv is 94m.
Kharkiv lies in the large valley of rivers of Kharkiv, Lopan', Udy, and Nemyshlya.
Kharkiv has a large number of the green city parks with the long history of more than 100 years with very old oak trees and many flowers.
Kharkiv's climate is humid continental (Köppen climate classification Dfb) with cold and snowy winters as well as the dry and hot summers.
Kharkiv has rather sunny warm summers which, however, are relatively mild compared to temperatures in South European regions, due to the region's lower elevation, proximity to the Black Sea, and the city's latitude.
Kharkiv has relatively long and cold winters.
The average rainfall totals per year, with the most in June and July.
The Kharkiv International Marathon is considered as a prime international sportive event, attracting many thousands of professional sportsmen, young people, students, professors, locals and tourists to travel to Kharkiv and to participate in the international event [REF].
The most popular sport is football.
There is also a female football club WFC Zhytlobud-1 Kharkiv, which represented Ukraine in the European competitions and constantly is the main contender for the national title.
Metalist Stadium hosted three group matches at UEFA Euro 2012.
Kharkiv also has an Ice Hockey club, HC Vityaz Kharkiv who compete in the Ukrainian Vyscha Liga.
Avangard Budy is a bandy club from Kharkiv, which won the Ukrainian championship in 2013.
There is a men's volleyball team Lokomotiv Kharkiv which performs in Ukraine and in the European competitions.
RC Olimp' is the city's rugby union club.
Tennis is a very popular sport in Kharkiv.
There is a golf club in Kharkiv [REF].
Horseriding as a sport is very popular among the locals [REF].
There is a growing interest to the cycling among the locals [REF].
The international industrial exhibitions are usually conducted at the Radmir Expohall exhibition center in Kharkiv [REF].
During the Soviet era, Kharkiv was the capital of industrial production in Ukraine and the third largest centre of industry and commerce in the USSR.
State-owned industrial giants, such as Turboatom and Elektrotyazhmash[REF] occupy 17% of the heavy power equipment construction (e.g., turbines) market worldwide.
The IT industry is represented by a few hundred small IT start ups, which form a cluster of IT companies in Kharkiv[REF][REF][REF][REF] .
Kharkiv is also the headquarters of one of the largest Ukrainian banks, UkrSibbank, which has been part of the BNP Paribas group since December 2005.
There are many large modern shopping malls in Kharkiv.
Kharkiv contains numerous beautiful parks and gardens such as the Gor'ky park, Shevchenko park, Hydro park, Strelka park, Feldman ecopark, etc.
The Gor'ky park is very popular place for recreation activities among the visitors and local people.
The Shevchenko park is situated in close proximity to the V.N.
The Ecopark is situated at circle highway around Kharkiv.
Kharkiv is an important religious center in Eastern Ukraine.
There are many old and new cathedrals, associated with various churches in Kharkiv.
The St. Assumption Orthodox Cathedral was built in Kharkiv in the 1680s and re-built in 1820s-1830s [REF].
The St. Pokrovsky Orthodox Monastery Cathedral was created in Kharkiv in 1689-1729 [REF].
The St. Annunciation Orthodox Cathedral is one of the tallest Orthodox churches in the world.
The St. Trinity Orthodox Cathedral was built in Kharkiv in 1758-1764 and re-built in 1857-1861 [REF].
The St. Valentine Orthodox Cathedral was built in Kharkiv in the 2010s [REF].
The St. Tamara Orthodox Cathedral was built in Kharkiv in 2012 [REF].
The St. Peace Bringing Wives Orthodox Cathedral was built in green park near Mirror Stream fountain in August, 2015 [REF].
The Roman Catholic St. Mary Cathedral was built in Kharkiv in 1887-1892.
There is the old Kharkiv Choral Synagogue, which was fully renovated in Kharkiv in 1991-2016.
The Vasyl N. Karazin Kharkiv National University is the most prestigious reputable classic university, which was founded due to the efforts by Vasily Karazin in Kharkiv in 1804-1805 [REF].
The city has 13 national universities and numerous professional, technical and private higher education institutions, offering its students a wide range of disciplines.
About 9,000 foreign students from 96 countrie s study in the city.
The city has a high concentration of research institutions, which are independent or loosely connected with the universities.
A number of world-renowned scientific schools appeared in Kharkiv, such as the theoretical physics school and the mathematical school.
There is the Kharkiv Scientists House in the city, which was built by A. N. Beketov, architect in Kharkiv in 1900.
In addition to the libraries affiliated with the various universities and research institutions, the Kharkiv State Scientific V. Korolenko-library is a major research library.
Kharkiv has 212 (secondary education) schools, including 10 lyceums and 20 gymnasiums.
There is the educational "Landau Center", which is named after Prof. L.D. Landau, Nobel laureate in Kharkiv [REF].
Archeological evidence discovered in the area of present-day Kharkiv indicates that a population has existed in that area since the second millennium BC.
The city was founded by re-settlers who were running away from the war that engulfed Right-bank Ukraine in 1654 (see Khmelnytsky Uprising) [REF].
At first the settlement was self-governed under the jurisdiction of a voivode from Chuhuiv that is 40km to the east [REF].
In 1658 Ivan Ofrosimov was appointed as the new voivode, who worked on forcing locals to kiss the cross to show loyalty to the Moscow tsar [REF].
Meanwhile, Kharkiv had become the centre of Sloboda Ukraine [REF].
The Kharkiv Fortress was erected around the Assumption Cathedral and its castle was at University Hill [REF].
In 1689 the fortress was expanded and included the Saint-Pokrov Cathedral and Monastery which was baptized[REF] and became the center of local eparchy.
In the course of the administrative reform carried out in 1708 by Peter the Great, the area was included into Kiev Governorate.
Kharkiv University was established in 1805 in the Palace of Governorate-General [REF].
The streets were first cobbled in the city centre in 1830 [REF].
Kharkiv became a major industrial centre and with it a centre of Ukrainian culture.
Soon after the Crimean War, in 1860-61 number of hromada societies sprung up across the Ukrainian cities including Kharkiv [REF].
When the Tsentralna Rada announced the establishment of the Ukrainian People's Republic in November 1917 it envisioned the Sloboda Ukraine Governorate to be part of it [REF].
Prior to the formation of the Soviet Union, Bolsheviks established Kharkiv as the capital of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic (from 1919 to 1934) in opposition to the Ukrainian People's Republic with its capital of Kiev [REF].
As the country's capital, it underwent intense expansion with the construction of buildings to house the newly established Ukrainian Soviet government and administration.
In 1928, the SVU (Union for the Freedom of Ukraine) process was initiated and court sessions were staged in the Kharkiv Opera (now the Philharmonia) building.
In the early 1930s, the Holodomor famine drove many people off the land into the cities, and to Kharkiv in particular, in search of food.
During April and May 1940 about 3,900 Polish prisoners of Starobelsk camp were executed in the Kharkiv NKVD building, later secretly buried on the grounds of an NKVD pansionat in Pyatykhatky forest (part of the Katyn massacre) on the outskirts of Kharkiv [REF].
During World War II, Kharkiv was the site of several military engagements (see below).
The significant Jewish population of Kharkiv (Kharkiv's Jewish community prided itself with the second largest synagogue in Europe) suffered greatly during the war.
Before the occupation, Kharkiv's tank industries were evacuated to the Urals with all their equipment, and became the heart of Red Army's tank programs (particularly, producing the T-34 tank earlier designed in Kharkiv).
Of the population of 700,000 that Kharkiv had before the start of World War II, 120,000 became Ost-Arbeiter (slave worker) in Germany, 30,000 were executed and 80,000 starved to death during the war [REF].
In the post-World War II period many of the destroyed homes and factories were rebuilt.
Gas lines were installed for heating in government and later private homes.
By its territorial expansion on September 6, 2012 the city increased its area from about [REF].
A well-known landmark of Kharkiv is the Freedom Square (Ploshcha Svobody formerly known as Dzerzhinsky Square), which is the sixth largest city square in Europe, and the 12th largest square in the world.
There is an underground rapid-transit system (metro) with about of track and 29 stations.
Kharkiv was a host city for the UEFA Euro 2012, and hosted three group soccer matches at the reconstructed Metalist Stadium.
A large number of the Orthodox cathedrals were built in Kharkiv in the 1990s and 2000s.
In 2007, the Vietnamese minority in Kharkiv built the largest Buddhist temple in Europe on a 1 hectare plot with a monument to Ho Chi Minh [REF].
The Gor'ky park was fully renovated in Kharkiv in the 2000s, having a big number of modern attractions, a lake with lilies and the sport facilities to play tennis, football, beach volleyball, and basketball.
The Mayor of Kharkiv and the City Council govern all the business and administrative affairs in the City of Kharkiv.
The Mayor of Kharkiv has the executive powers
The Mayor of Kharkiv is elected by the direct public election in Kharkiv every four years.
The City Council is composed of elected representatives, who approve or reject the initiatives on the budget allocation, tasks priorities and other issues in Kharkiv.
The mayor and city council hold their regular meetings in the City Hall in Kharkiv.
The 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine affected Kharkiv but to a lesser extent than in neighbouring Donbass, where tensions would lead to armed conflict [REF].
Kharkiv returned to relative calm by 30 April [REF].
From early November until mid-December, Kharkiv was struck by seven non-lethal bomb blasts.
On 8 January 2015 five men wearing balaclavas broke into an office of (the volunteer group aiding refugees from Donbass) Station Kharkiv [REF].
On Sunday 22 February 2015, there was a terrorist bomb attack on a march to commemorate people who died in the Euromaidan protests in 2014.
On 23 September 2015, 200 people in balaclavas and camouflage picketed the house of former governor Mykhailo Dobkin, and then went to Kharkiv town hall, where they tried to force their way through the police cordon.
While Kharkiv is the administrative centre of the Kharkiv Oblast (province), the city affairs are managed by the Kharkiv Municipality.
The city of Kharkiv is one of the largest transportation centers in Ukraine, which is connected to numerous cities of the world by air, rail and road traffic.
Being an important transportation centre of Ukraine, many different means of transportation are available in Kharkiv.
The first railway connection of Kharkiv was opened in 1869.
Kharkiv is connected with all main cities in Ukraine and abroad by regular railway trains.
Kharkiv is served by Kharkiv International Airport has been granted international status.
Kharkiv is one of the main cultural centres in Ukraine.
The Kharkiv National Academic Opera and Ballet Theater named after N. V. Lysenko is a biggest theater in Kharkiv [REF].
The Kharkiv State Academic Drama Theater named after T. G. Shevchenko is popular among Ukrainian speaking people [REF] .
The Kharkiv Academic Russian Drama Theater named after A.S. Pushkin was recently renovated, and it is quite popular among the locals [REF].
In the 1930s Kharkiv was referred to as a Literary Klondike.
Today, Kharkiv is often referred to as the "capital city" of Ukrainian Science fiction and Fantasy [REF].
There is the Kharkiv Philharmonic Society in the city [REF].
There is the Organ Music Hall in the city [REF].
There is the Kharkiv Conservatory is in the city.
The Kharkiv National University of Arts named after I.P. Kotlyarevsky is situated in the city [REF].
Kharkiv sponsors the prestigious Hnat Khotkevych International Music Competition of Performers of Ukrainian Folk Instruments, which takes place every three years.
The "Kharkiv Lilacs" international movie festival is very popular among the movie stars, makers, producers in Ukraine, Eastern Europe, Western Europe and North America [REF].
The festival is usually conducted in May every year [REF].
There is a special alley with the metal hand prints by the popular movies actors at Shevchenko park in Kharkiv.
Kharkiv was/is a home for many famous painters Ilya Repin, Zinaida Serebryakova, Henryk Siemiradzki, Vasyl Yermilov, etc.
There is the Kharkiv History Museum named after M. F. Sumtsov in the city [REF].
The Natural History Museum at V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University was founded in Kharkiv on April 2, 1807.
The V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University History Museum was established in Kharkiv in 1972 [REF].
The V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University Archeology Museum was founded in Kharkiv on March 20, 1998.
The National Technical University "Kharkiv Polytechnical Institute" Museum was created in Kharkiv on December 29, 1972 [REF].
The National Aerospace University "Kharkiv Aviation Institute" Museum was founded on May 29, 1992 [REF].
The "National University of Pharmacy" Museum was founded in Kharkiv on September 15, 2010 [REF].
There are around 147 museums in the Kharkiv's region [REF].
After the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea the monument to Petro Konashevych-Sahaidachny in Sevastopol was removed and handed over to Kharkiv [REF].
Anne Baxter, played by Tessa James, made her first on-screen appearance on 10 August 2006.
The character of Anne was James' first television role and she said "It was a great first role, I couldn't have wished for anything better.
When she was ten, Anne lost her sight to an illness.
Anne tries to steal Bree's boyfriend, Zeke Kinski (Matthew Werkmeister).
Loris finds Anne and tells her that she swapped the babies because she was angry at Janelle for trying to shut her out of her grandchildren's lives.
Loris Timmins, played by Kate Fitzpatrick,[REF] made her first on-screen appearance on 28 August 2006.
Loris was not happy when Kim (Brett Swain) married Janelle Rebecchi (Nell Feeney).
Loris is shocked to find out that Bree's (Sianoa Smit-McPhee) new friend, Anne (Tessa James), is the girl who she had been swapped with at the hospital.
Charlie Hoyland made his first screen appearance on 20 March 2006.
On 13 October 2015, it was announced that the character would be returning in early 2016, with Alexander McGuire now in the role [REF].
When Steph falls pregnant, she is also diagnosed with breast cancer.
When Steph takes Charlie to the garage, she is distracted by her new partner Greg Michaels (Nick Farnell) and a cabinet falls on Charlie.
A few years later, Lyn brings Charlie back to Erinsborough, promising him a surprise.
Cameron Robinson, played by Adam Hunter, made his first on-screen appearance on 28 March 2006.
Ruth Deller of television website, Lowculture, called Cameron "an all-round nice guy (who was bumped off by Max Hoyland, as if we didn't have enough reason to hate that bloke)."[REF] .
Cameron grew up in Tasmania with Gail (Fiona Corke), his sister Elle (Pippa Black) and identical twin, Robert (Adam Hunter).
Robert pretends to wake from his coma and convinces Paul and Gail that Cameron is the real psycho.
Christine Rodd, played by Trudy Hellier, made her first on-screen appearance on 31 October 2006.
Following the breakdown of her marriage to Allan Steiger (Joe Clements), Christine realises that she is gay and she struggles to tell her ex-husband or their daughter, Pepper (Nicky Whelan).
During a family dinner, Christine is shocked when Allan proposes to her and she admits that Carol is her girlfriend.
Teresa Cammeniti, played by Hannah Greenwood, made her first on-screen appearance on 22 September 2006.
Greenwood received a phone call from her agent who told her about an audition from Neighbours.
Teresa falls pregnant when she is seventeen and she asks Carmella Cammeniti (Natalie Blair) for help.
Sky leaves the hospital to find Stingray and Teresa, who had been admitted to the psychiatric ward, follows her.
Guy Sykes, played by Fletcher Humphrys, made his first on-screen appearance on 26 October 2006.
In 2006, it was announced that former All Saints actor Fletcher Humphreys had joined the cast as a character named Guy [REF].
Katya is shocked when Guy arrives in town with DVD footage of her committing crimes.
Guy is paroled and he reads a news story about a bag of money found in the community gardens.
For his portrayal of Guy, Humphrys was nominated for "Best Bad Boy" at the 2009 Inside Soap Awards [REF].
Glenn Forrest, played by Cleopatra Coleman, made her first on-screen appearance on 14 November 2006.
Coleman enjoyed playing the role of Glenn and said she would like a return to the show [REF].
When Boyd Hoyland (Kyal Marsh) returns to Erinsborough after going to look for his father, he tells his wife, Janae (Eliza Taylor-Cotter), that he saved a young woman, Glenn, from drowning in a river and they had a one-night stand.
Everyone believes that Janae is behind the incident with the car, but it is revealed that Lolly Allen (Adelaide Kane), sabotaged the brakes believing the car belonged to her abusive stepmother.
Mishka Schneiderova, played by Deborah Kennedy, made her first on-screen appearance on 17 April 2006.
Lou Carpenter (Tom Oliver) finds a website advertising Russian brides and gets in touch with a woman named Mishka.
Mishka settles into the community and becomes a regular at the Russian club.
Lou flies to Moscow and Mishka tells him to go home.
Kerry Breanna Mangel, played by Claudine Henningsen, is the daughter of Sky Mangel and Dylan Timmins.
Claudine Henningsen joined Neighbours when she was seven days old [REF].
During her pregnancy Sky is admitted to the hospital after collapsing because she was not eating properly.
Kerry is diagnosed with leukaemia and Stingray and Dylan are the only bone marrow matches.
Robert Robinson, played by Adam Hunter, made his first on-screen appearance on 28 March 2006.
Ruth Deller of television website Lowculture, praised Robert, calling him the "best psycho the street had seen since, well, Michael Martin."[REF]
Robert is resentful towards his father for being absent and becomes withdrawn as he grows up.
Robert gets a job at Erinsborough Hospital and meets Katya Kinski (Dichen Lachman).
Robert takes Paul camping and ties him up in a mineshaft.
In arthritis of the shoulder, the cartilage of the ball and socket (glenohumeral joint) is lost so that bone rubs on bone.
Arthritis of the shoulder causes pain and loss of motion and use of the shoulder.
X-rays of the shoulder show loss of the normal space between the ball and socket.
Early on arthritis of the shoulder can be managed with mild analgesics and gentle exercises [REF].
In the case of rheumatoid arthritis, specific medications selected by a rheumatologist may offer substantial relief.
When exercise and medication are no longer effective, shoulder replacement surgery for arthritis may be considered.
The [[acromioclavicular joint|acromioclavicular articulation]] consists of the [[acromioclavicular ligament]] and a small disk of cartilage located in between the acromion and the clavicle.
Pain is perceived on shoulder motion, especially on certain movements.
Conservative treatment for this joint is similar to treatments for other types of arthritis, including restricting activity, anti-inflammatory medications (or supplements), physical therapy, and occasionally cortisone shots.
A shoulder separation occurs where the collarbone (clavicle) meets the shoulder blade (scapula).
Shoulder pain or tenderness and, occasionally, a bump in the middle of the top of the shoulder (over the AC joint) are signs that a separation may have occurred.
A shoulder separation is usually treated conservatively by rest and wearing a sling.
A SLAP (superior labrum anterior to posterior) tear occurs when the cartilage of the shoulder (labrum) delaminates from glenoid.
Symptoms include a dull ache deep in the shoulder joint, trouble sleeping due to the instability and discomfort, and extreme weakness in overhead activities .
The best diagnosis for a SLAP tear is a clinical exam followed by an MRI combined with a contrast agent .
Very few cases recover to complete mobility without surgical intervention.
Recovery is often a lengthy process.
While not directly a shoulder problem, this may affect shoulder functionality due to problems with sternoclavicular rotation.
An X-Ray or CT-Scan may be necessary to accurately diagnose a sternoclavicular separation.
Treatment consists of the standard use of plenty of rest, icing, NSAIDs and a sling.
A bone fracture of the shoulder involves a partial or total crack through one of the three bones in the shoulder, the clavicle, the scapula, and the humerus.
A shoulder fracture that occurs after a major injury is usually accompanied by severe pain.
(However this occur in non-involved dislocations and separations.)
When a fracture occurs, the doctor tries to bring the bones into a position that will promote healing and restore arm movement.
Fracture of the neck of the humerus is usually treated with a sling or shoulder immobilizer.
Medical history (the patient tells the doctor about an injury or other condition that might be causing the pain).
Physical examination of the shoulder to feel for injury and discover the limits of movement, location of pain, and extent of joint instability.
Tests to confirm the diagnosis of certain conditions.
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging)--A non-invasive procedure in which a machine produces a series of cross-sectional images of the shoulder.
Other diagnostic tests, such as injection of an anesthetic into and around the shoulder joint.
The bones of the shoulder are held in place by muscles, tendons, and ligaments.
The rotator cuff is a structure composed of tendons that, with associated muscles, holds the ball at the top of the humerus in the glenoid socket and provides mobility and strength to the shoulder joint.
Four filmy sac-like structures called bursa permit smooth gliding between bone, muscle, and tendon.
These conditions are closely related and may occur alone or in combination.
Tendinitis is inflammation (redness, soreness, and swelling) of a tendon.
An inflamed bursa is called bursitis.
Signs of these conditions include the slow onset of discomfort and pain in the upper shoulder or upper third of the arm and/or difficulty sleeping on the shoulder.
Diagnosis of tendinitis and bursitis begins with a medical history and physical examination.
Anti-inflammatory medicines such as aspirin, naproxen or ibuprofen among others can be taken to help with pain.
In those with calcific tendinitis of the shoulder high energy extracorporeal shock-wave therapy can be useful [REF].
The term "rotator cuff" refers to a group of four tendons that blend together as they attach to the upper end of the arm bone (humerus).
The shoulder joint is the most frequently dislocated major joint of the body.
Almost all shoulder dislocations are downwards (inferior) and of these, 95% are in a forward direction.
Doctors treat a dislocation by putting the head of the humerus back into the joint socket (glenoid fossa) of the scapula - a procedure called manipulation and reduction (M&R).
After treatment and recovery, a previously dislocated shoulder may remain more susceptible to reinjury, especially in young, active individuals.
Sometimes the doctor performs surgery through a tiny incision into which a small scope (arthroscope) is inserted to observe the inside of the joint.
By 1801, the subsidies due under the various treaties for support of a British force had fallen into hopeless arrears.
After the Rohilla War, the change of the power structure did little to soothe the troubled strife torn area; rather the change had the effect to aggravate a precarious state of affairs.
Mr. Henry Wellesley, brother of the Governor General, was appointed president of the Board of Commissioners sitting in Bareilly.
After annexation in 1801, Rohilkhand was divided into two districts, Bareilly and a comparatively new city of Moradabad.
Bareilly (Rohilkhand) was a major centre during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 (also known as India's First War of Independence).
The news of the outbreak of the struggle of independence which started at Meerut reached Bareilly on 14 May 1857.
During the Mutiny of 1857 the Rohillas, though already been disarmed, took a very active part against the English [REF].
British order was restored on 13 May 1858 by the British force lent by Commander Colin Campbell, 1st Baron Clyde of 9th Regiment of Foot of British Army with the help of Captain William George Drummond Stewart of 93rd (Sutherland) Highlanders of the British Army, after winning the Bareilly battle.
Communal hatred led to ugly communal riots in many parts of U.P. The green flag was hoisted and Muslims in Bareilly, Bijnor, Moradabad, and other places the Muslims shouted for the revival of Muslim kingdom [REF].
During the First War of Indian Independence in 1857, Khan Bhadur Khan issued silver coins from Bareilly as an independent ruler.
The main conflict occurred largely in the upper Gangetic plain and central India, with the major hostilities confined to present-day Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, northern Madhya Pradesh, and the Delhi region [REF].
The population in 1901 was 1,090,117.
Bareilly is well connected with the rest of the country through railways from the 19th century.
The Oudh and Tirhut Railway was a Railway company operated the railway line till 1943 and managed a number of lines until 1943, when it was amalgamated with the Rohilkund and Kumaon Railway, and the Lucknow Bareilly Railway.
The Oudh and Tirhut Railway was formed on 1 January 1943 by the amalgamation of the Bengal and North Western Railway, the Tirhut Railway (BNW worked), the Mashrak-Thawe Extension Railway,(BNW worked), the Rohilkund and Kumaon Railway and the Lucknow-Bareilly Railway (R&K worked).
Its headquarters was at Gorakhpur.
At the beginning of the 13th century, when the Delhi Sultanate, five short-lived, Delhi based kingdoms or sultanates, of Turkic origin, was firmly established, Katehr was divided into the provinces of Sambhal and Budaun.
The slightest weakening of the central authority provoked acts of defiance from the Katehriya Rajputs.
The city of Bareilly was founded in 1537 by Basdeo, a Katehriya Rajput.
Rohilkhand was handed over to the Nawab Vazir of Awadh.
Saadat Ali was appointed governor of Bareilly under the Oudh government.
In 1794 a revolution in Rampur State led to the dispatch of British Troops, who fought the insurgents at Bhitaura or Fatehganj(West)-both in Bareilly District, where an obelisk still commemorates the slain.
Bareilly remained in the hands of the Wazir until 1801, when Rohilkhand, with Allahabad and Kora, was ceded to the British in lieu of tribute.
The experiment in non-monarchical form of Government in Panchala was soon engulfed in the growing Magadhen imperialism - first under the Nandas and then under the Mauryas.
Panchala emerges at this time as one of the strongest powers in India.
Evidence reveal that the Panchal coins were minted at Bareilly and the surrounding areas during 176 - 166 BC.
The amalgamation of several religious and popular beliefs may be observed throughout the history of Panchala in ancient India.
After the fall of the Guptas in the latter half of the 6th century the district of Bareilly came under the domination of the Maukharis.
Historically, Bareilly region was the capital of the ancient Kingdom of Uttara-Panchala (Northern Panchala).
The Kingdom occupied the country (region) to the east of the Kuru Kingdom, i.e. between the upper Himalayas and the river Ganges.
The Uttara-Panchala (Northern Panchala) had its capital at Ahicchattra (also known as Adhichhatra and Chhatravati, near present-day Ramnagar village in Aonla region of Bareilly, while Dakshina-Panchala (Southern Panchala) had it capital at Kampilya or Kampil in Farrukhabad district.
The names of the last two Panchala clans, the Somakas and the Srinjayas are also mentioned in the Mahabharata and the Puranas.
After the accession of Shuja-ud-daula as the Nawab of Oudh, Rohilkhand (under Hafiz Rahmat Khan Barech) joined the imperial troops in their attack upon that prince, but the Nawab bought them off with a subsidy of 500,000.
The Marathas defeated Rohilla in 1772 and overran whole of Rohilkhand in 1772, after which Rohilla asked for Nawab of Oudh help but Nawab knew that his forces are no match to the Marathas.
After the war Nawab Shuja-ud-Daula demanded payment for their help from the Rohilla chief, Hafiz Rahmat Khan Barech.
In the 6th century BC, the Panchala was among one of the sixteen mehajanapadas of India.
The Jain Tirthankara Parshva is said to have attained Kaivalya at Ahichhatra.
During Harsha's reign the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsang also visited Ahichhatra about 635 AD [REF].
The Mughal policy of encouraging Afghan settlements for keeping the Katehriyas in check worked only as long as the central government was strong.
In 1623 two Afghan brothers of the Barech tribe, Shah Alam and Husain Khan, settled in the region, bringing with them many other Pashtun settlers.
Bareilly as a ruined city became crowded with unemployed, restless Rohilla Pathans.
Meanwhile, Ali Muhammad Khan (1737-1749), grandson of Shah Alam, captured the city of Bareilly and made it his capital, later uniting the Rohillas to form the 'State of Rohilkhand', between 1707 and 1720, making Bareilly his capital.
According to 1901 census of India, the total Pathan population in Bareilly District was 40,779, out of a total population of 1,090,117 [REF].
The term Rohilla is derived from the Pashtu Roh, meaning mountain, and literally means a mountain air, and was used by the Baluch and Jats of the Derajat region to refer to the Pashtun mountains tribes of Loralai, Zhob and Waziristan regions.
Ali Muhammad was succeeded by Hafiz Rahmat Khan Barech (1749-1774), whom he appointed h¹fiz or regent of Rohilkhand on his deathbed [REF].
Under Rahmat Ali Khan, Rohilla power continued to rise, though the area was torn by strife amongst the rival chieftains and continuous struggles with the neighbouring powers, particularly the Nawab Vazirs of Awadh,[REF] the Bangash Nawabs,[REF] and the Marathas [REF].
The First Rohilla War of 1773-1774 was a punitive campaign by Shuja-ud-Daula, Nawab of Awadh, against the Rohillas, Afghan highlanders settled in Rohilkhand, northern India.
The combined forces of Shuja-ud Daulah, the Nawab of Awadh and the Company's forces led by Colonel Champion defeated Hafiz Rahmat Ali Khan in 1774.
Rohilkhand fell to Awadh, was plundered and occupied.
The Rohillas, after fifty years' precarious independence, were subjugated in 1774 by the confederacy of British troops with the nawab of Oudh's army, which formed so serious a charge against Warren Hastings [REF].
On 24 April 1916 the Easter Rising began.
De Valera was the only commandant of a battalion who was not executed [REF].
De Valera's supporters and detractors argue about his bravery during the Easter Rising.
After imprisonment in Dartmoor, Maidstone and Lewes prisons, de Valera and his comrades were released under an amnesty in June 1917.
Éamon de Valera was born on 14 October 1882 in New York City, the son of Catherine Coll-an Irishwoman originally from Bruree, County Limerick-and Juan Vivion de Valera, described on the birth certificate as an artist born in Spain.
According to Coll, Juan Vivion died in 1885 leaving Coll and her child in poor circumstances [REF].
He played rugby at Blackrock, and later, during his tenure at Rockwell College, he joined the school's rugby team where he played fullback on the first team, which reached the final of the Munster Senior Cup.
Always a diligent student, at the end of his first year in Blackrock College he was Student of the Year.
There were occasions when de Valera seriously contemplated the religious life like his half-brother, Fr Thomas Wheelwright, but ultimately he did not pursue this vocation.
As a young Gaeilgeoir (Irish speaker), de Valera became an activist for the language.
Relations between the new Irish government, which was backed by most of the Dáil and the electorate, and the anti-Treatyites under the nominal leadership of de Valera, now descended into the Irish Civil War (June 1922 to May 1923), in which the pro-treaty Free State forces defeated the anti-Treaty IRA.
Though nominally head of the anti-Treatyites, de Valera had little influence.
In March 1923, de Valera attended the meeting of the IRA Army Executive to decide on the future of the war.
On 30 May 1923, the IRA's new Chief of Staff Frank Aiken (Lynch had been killed) called a ceasefire and ordered volunteers to "dump arms".
After this point many of the republicans were arrested in Free State "round ups" when they had come out of hiding and returned home.
In the 1932 general election Fianna Fáil secured 72 seats and became the largest party in the Dáil, although without a majority.
He at once initiated steps to fulfil his election promises to abolish the oath and withhold land annuities owed to the UK for loans provided under the Irish Land Acts and agreed as part of the 1921 Treaty.
After advising King George V to dismiss McNeill as governor-general, the King suggested McNeill instead carry on a while longer as viceroy and then resign, which he did on 1 November 1932.
De Valera took charge of Ireland's foreign policy as well by also acting as Minister for External Affairs.
De Valera's government followed the policy of unilaterally dismantling the treaty of 1921.
The ACA changed its name to the National Guard under O'Duffy.
De Valera's political creed evolved from militant republicanism to social and cultural conservatism [REF].
Ireland's dominant political personality for many decades, de Valera received numerous honours.
De Valera was criticised for ending up as co-owner of one of Ireland's most influential group of newspapers, Irish Press Newspapers, funded by numerous small investors who received no dividend for decades [REF].
A notable failure was his attempt to reverse the provision of the 1937 Constitution in relation to the electoral system.
In recent years, historians have emphasised his failures, comparing him unfavourably to his great rival Michael Collins.
In his devout Catholicism, his rejection of material ostentation, his determination to revive the Irish language, and his inability to comprehend Protestant Ulster's fears of Catholic domination, a historian portrays de Valera as representative of his generation in southern Ireland [REF].
Sinn Féin won a huge majority in the 1918 general election, largely thanks to the British executions of the 1916 leaders, the threat of conscription with the Conscription Crisis of 1918 and the first past the post ballot.
In the hope of securing international recognition, Seán T. O'Kelly was sent as envoy to Paris to present the Irish case to the Peace Conference convened by the great powers at the end of World War I.
De Valera managed to raise $5,500,000 from American supporters, an amount that far exceeded the hopes of the Dáil [REF].
Meanwhile in Ireland, conflict between the British authorities and the Dáil (which the British declared illegal in September 1919) escalated into the Irish War of Independence.
While Fianna Fáil remained popular among the electorate, 75-year-old de Valera had begun to be seen by the electorate as too old and out of touch to remain at the head of government [REF].
De Valera was inaugurated President on 25 June 1959.
As President, de Valera received many state visits, including the 1963 visit of American President John F. Kennedy.
In 1966 the Dublin Jewish community arranged the planting and dedication of the Éamon de Valera Forest in Israel, near Nazareth, in recognition of his consistent support for Ireland's Jews [REF].
In January 1969, de Valera became the first President to address both houses of the Oireachtas, to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the foundation of Dáil Éireann.
In 1969, seventy-three countries sent goodwill messages to NASA for the historic first lunar landing.
After the IRA dumped their arms rather than surrender them or continue a now fruitless war, de Valera returned to political methods.
During this time, de Valera came to believe that abstentionism was not a workable tactic in the long term.
The new party made swift electoral gains in the 1927 general election, taking much of Sinn Féin's previous support.
De Valera never organised Fianna Fáil in Northern Ireland and it was not until 7 December 2007 that Fianna Fáil was registered there by the UK Electoral Commission [REF].
During the 1930s, de Valera had systematically stripped down the Irish Free State constitution that had been drafted by a committee under the nominal chairmanship of his rival, Michael Collins.
The Oath of Allegiance was abolished, as were appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
The constitution contained reforms and symbols intended to assert Irish sovereignty.
similarly, the recognition of the "special position" of the Catholic Church was inconsistent with the identity and aspirations of northern Protestants (leading to its repeal in the 1970s), while simultaneously falling short of the demands of hardline Catholics and the Church for Catholicism to be explicitly made the state religion.
As Bew concludes, in the constitution of 1937, de Valera was "trying to placate left-wing Republicans with national phrases and pious people with expressly Catholic bits" and "patriarchal Catholicism."[REF] .
De Valera balked at the agreement.
After the Treaty was narrowly ratified by 64 to 57, de Valera and a large minority of Sinn Féin TDs left Dáil Éireann.
De Valera objected to the statement of fidelity that the treaty required Irish parliamentarians to take an oath of allegiance to the King.
With the new constitution in place, de Valera determined that the changed circumstances made swift resolution to Ireland's ongoing trade war with the UK more desirable for both sides-as did the growing probability of the outbreak of war across Europe.
By September 1939, a general European war was imminent.
Controversially,[REF] de Valera formally offered his condolences to the German Minister in Dublin on the death of Adolf Hitler in 1945, in accordance with diplomatic protocol [REF].
After de Valera had spent sixteen years in power-without answering the crucial questions of partition and republican status-the public demanded a change from Fianna Fáil government.
However, this was brought undone when the other parties realised that if they banded together, they would have one seat fewer than Fianna Fáil, and would be able to form a government with the support of at least seven independents.
De Valera, now leader of the opposition, left the actual parliamentary practice of opposing the government to his deputy, Seán Lemass, and himself embarked on a world campaign to address the issue of partition.
Returning to Ireland, during the Mother and Child Scheme crisis that racked the First Inter-Party Government, de Valera kept a dignified silence as Leader of the Opposition, preferring to stay aloof from the controversy.
On 16 September 1953 de Valera met Churchill for the first and only time, at 10 Downing Street.
It was during this period that de Valera's eyesight began to deteriorate and he was forced to spend several months in the Netherlands, where he had six operations.
Like the first coalition government, the second lasted only three years.
De Valera's final term as Taoiseach also saw the passage of numerous reforms in health and welfare.
Smørrebrød (originally smør og brød, meaning "butter and bread") usually consists of a piece of buttered rye bread (rugbrød), a dense, dark brown bread.
Røget ål med røræg Smoked eel on dark rye bread, topped with scrambled eggs, herbs and a slice of lemon.
Leverpostej Warm rough-chopped liverpaste served on dark rye bread, topped with bacon, and sauteed mushrooms.
Roast beef, thinly sliced and served on dark rye bread, topped with a portion of remoulade, and decorated with a sprinkling of shredded horseradish and crispy fried onions.
Roast pork (ribbensteg), thinly sliced and served on dark rye bread, topped with red cabbage, and decorated with a slice of orange.
Rullepølse, (rolled stuffed pork) with a slice of meat jelly, onions, tomatoes and parsley.
Tartar, with salt and pepper, served on dark rye bread, topped with raw onion rings, grated horseradish and a raw egg yolk.
Gløgg, hot punch made with red wine, brandy and sherry with raisins and almonds.
Varm kakao, hot chocolate often served to children and an essential part of family hygge.
Mjød, mead made legendary by the Vikings [REF].
Carbonated water, Danskvand, translated Danish Water, often flavoured with citrus.
Saftevand, a juice drink made from fruit syrup and water, often served to children.
Danish wine, produced in small quantities, but still very expensive.
Danish culture has a number of annual recurring traditional feasts.
The celebration of New Year's Eve is perhaps on par with both Christmas and Easter in modern times and is also coupled with some strong food traditions.
A special variation on det kolde bord is the Christmas lunch of julefrokost, in particular celebrated as a family event on Christmas Day or shortly after.
A favorite at Christmas lunches is Risalamande, a rice pudding served with hot or cold cherry sauce; it consists of mainly cold rice poridge mixed with whipped cream, vanilla and chopped almonds.
A very special part of not only the julefrokost but of most festive, celebratory meals is the selskabssang (party song).
In Denmark, the Christmas dinner is served on the evening of 24 December (Christmas Eve).
Flæskesteg, a pork roast cut from the breast or neck and with the skin left on, is prepared by cutting the skin through to the meat layer sideways and rubbing it thoroughly with coarse salt flakes and sometimes spices to guarantee crispy tasty cracklings.
Goose and duck are filled with a stuffing of apple boats and prunes before they are roasted in a hot oven.
Families gather for lunch on Easter Sunday.
Potato recipes are ubiquitous in Danish cooking.
Especially prized are the season's early potatoes, such as those from Samsø.
Although the potato is the central vegetable in traditional Danish cooking, it is by no means the only vegetable associated with Danish cuisine.
Sweet and sour red cabbage (rødkål).
Horseradish sauce (peberrodssovs), a cream sauce served with roast beef or prime rib.
Ketchup, a must with red sausages, along with mustard.
Mayonnaise, used in food preparation, and as a condiment with pommes frites (French fries).
Parsley sauce (persillesovs), a white sauce which is generously flavored with parsley.
Pepper sauce, served with steaks.
Remoulade, a very commonly used condiment.
Denmark is known for good cheeses.
While the traditional, commonly eaten cheese (skæreost) in Denmark is mild, there are also stronger cheeses associated with Danish cuisine.
Strong cheeses are an acquired taste for Danes too.
Denmark lost a long legal battle with Greece,[REF] to use the term "feta" for a Danish cheese produced using artificially blanched cow's milk.
Mycella, a traditional cow's milk creamy cheese.
Vesterhavsost, Hard cheese from cow's milk, and aged in caves.
Havarti, a semi-soft cow's milk cheese, named after the experimental farm from which it originated in the mid-19th century.
Apetina, a blanched cow's milk cheese.
Fresh herbs are very popular, and a wide variety are readily available at supermarkets or local produce stands.
Similarly to vegetables, fruit had to withstand long storage during the winter to become a part of the traditional cuisine.
Gooseberry (Stikkelsbær) literally 'thorny berries'.
Strawberries (Jordbær), literally 'earth berries' .
A combination of strawberries, red currants, black currants, blueberries and mulberries is known as "forest fruits" (skovbær) and is a common component in tarts and marmalades.
Rødgrød med fløde is often jokingly used by Danes as a shibboleth, as it contains the soft "d" several times, which most foreigners find difficult to pronounce.
Bread is a very important part of the Danish table [REF].
Denmark has a large variety of cakes and in 1997, the bakers guild launched the now countrywide celebration of Kagens Dag (Day of the Cake) as an annual recurring event in April-May [REF].
Wienerbrød (Danish pastry) - Denmark has a large variety of Danish pastries
Kringle - a pretzel-shaped Danish pastry.
Kagemand ("cake-man") - a Danish pastry in the shape of a man.
Småkager ("small-cakes") - Cookies, usually baked hard and crusty in an oven, but both pan and deep fried versions exist.
Pebernødder - ("pepper nuts") - A small, spicy cookie associated with Christmas.
Vaniljekranse - Vanilla-flavoured butter cookies in a ring-shape [REF].
Æbleskiver ("apple slices") - Similar to pancakes but made with a different dough and in special pans that produce a spherical pancake.
Kransekage ("ringcake") - A marzipan-based cake, usually served at special celebrations and on New Year's Eve.
Flødekager ("cream-cakes) - These cakes earn their name from the generous amounts of whipped cream used to make them and are served cold.
Lagkage (layer cake) - This cake has thin sponge cake layers, often with mashed berries and whipped cream or custard between the layers and decorated with fruit on top.
Pandekager (pancakes) - These are thin pancakes usually served with jam, granulated sugar and sometimes vanilla ice cream and rolled up before eaten.
Strawberry pie, very popular in the summer.
Denmark is not a noted exporter of candies, but Danes eat more candy per capita than in other countries [REF].
Chocolate - Denmark has a long tradition of producing delicious chocolate known worldwide, most famous brand is Anthon Berg.
Liquorice - A very popular herb extraction in Denmark used for a number of widely available sweets, but also ice cream, desserts and in some dishes as well.
Marzipan - A typical treat for Christmas, marzipan is enjoyed year round and also exported.
Wine gums - While similar looking and often similar branded as in other European countries, Danish wine gums are much less sweet and have more texture.
There also exists a vast amount of other types of sweets and candy, ranging from gumdrops and dragée to mints and caramel sweets.
Both Danish and imported candy are found in these box assortments, and the shape, texture and flavor differences are often extremely creative.
Eating out in restaurants can be a costly affair, with the average price running higher than that of the European average [REF].
In the big cities, and in shopping districts, there are many more reasonably priced eating places, including such chain fast food possibilities as McDonald's and Burger King.
Denmark has many fine dining restaurants, not only in the larger cities, but also in the countryside.
Another reasonable place to eat is at a café.
International café chains has become increasingly dominant in the capital of Copenhagen, currently including two Starbucks and several Caffè Ritazza (UK), at the Copenhagen Airport, Magasin Torv by the Magasin Du Nord department store, and at Copenhagen Central Station.
When the sausage is served in a traditional hot dog bun, it is called a "hot dog".
Danish cooking is rooted in the peasant dishes served across the country before the Industrial Revolution in 1860.
Over the centuries, sausage, which was not only economical but could be kept for long periods, was together with rye bread behind the development of smørrebrød.
In the 1960s and 1970s, with the availability of deep frozen goods, the concept of fast food arrived together with an interest in Mediterranean dishes as Danes travelled more widely.
Most Danes have three regular meals a day, usually consisting of a cold breakfast with coffee or tea, a cold lunch at work and a hot dinner at home with the family.
The basic Danish breakfast consists of coffee and rye bread, white bread, or rolls with cheese or jam.
On weekdays, various cereals such as corn flakes, muesli or rolled oats are often served for breakfast with just cold milk and sugar.
In Denmark, lunch is usually a cold meal consisting of a few simply prepared pieces of smørrebrød (open rye-bread sandwiches) with slices of cold meat, sliced sausage or hard boiled egg.
For the average family, dinner is the one meal of the day where everyone can be gathered, due to the pressures of the modern life where both parents are likely to work, and the children are in school or pre-school institutions.
Confusingly, the evening meal is sometimes called middag (midday) because hot meals were traditionally served in the middle of the day.
The Danish koldt bord or cold buffet corresponds to its Swedish counterpart, the smörgåsbord.
The meal begins with fish, usually pickled herring (marinerede sild), or another herring dish.
The cold table also consists of a wide variety of meat dishes and, despite its name, nearly always includes a few items which are served hot.
There will also be cold cuts such as hams, roast beef, salami, brisket of beef and spiced roulade.
Danish cuisine has also taken advantage of the possibilities inherent in traditional recipes, building on the use of local products and techniques that have not been fully exploited.
In 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2014 the Copenhagen restaurant Noma (short for nordisk mad - Nordic food) was named the world's best restaurant by the magazine Restaurant [REF].
In 2012, Danish chef and food activist Claus Meyer had his own show about Nordic cuisine on BBC Lifestyle [REF].
The everyday evening meal for most Danes consists of a main course and perhaps a dessert.
The first course is typically fish, although a wide variety of other appetisers are becoming more common.
Soup is often a meal on its own and mostly served with bread.
Fish, seafood and meat are prominent parts of any traditional Danish dish.
Denmark has a long tradition of fishing, since it is surrounded by the sea, consisting of many islands and a 7000 kilometer coastline.
Herring (sild), a whole section should be written about Danish herring dishes.
Plaice (rødspætte), in the form of fried, battered fish filets or as a common white fish in general food preparation (baked, steamed, poached).
Salmon (laks) -- smoked or gravad lox style.
Shrimp (rejer) -- Small shrimp from the north Atlantic are most common.
Roe (rogn) -- Fish eggs from cod, lumpfish (stenbider) and salmon.
Fish from Bornholm, Iceland and Greenland also has a special place in the Danish cuisine.
Beef is also very popular in the modern Danish kitchen.
Chicken is also popular, both served in the old traditional way, but also as a tray of frozen chicken pieces ready to put into the oven, lørdagskylling (lit.
Many traditional dishes have been abandoned in Denmark in the last 4-5 decades, especially dishes requiring long preparations but also organ meat dishes.
Frikadeller, pan-fried meat balls of pork or veal and pork with spices.
Stegt lever (fried liver), fried slices of calf's liver served like "Hakkebøf", but without the pickles.
Stegt flæsk med persillesovs, slices of fried pork served with potatoes and a bechamel sauce with chopped parsley (persillesauce).
Medisterpølse, thick, spicy sausage made of minced pork, fried and served in a variety of ways.
Æggekage (egg cake) -- similar to an omelette.
Påskelam (Easter lamb) grilled lamb with dry herbs and garlic.
Culottesteg, top sirloin steak with dry herbs served with potatoes and green salad.
Stegt gås, roast goose is sometimes served for Christmas.
Stegt and, roast duck prepared like roast goose, stuffed with baked apples, prunes and thyme.
Flæskesteg, roast pork with crackling, often served at Christmas.
Rødkål, sliced red cabbage stewed with duck grease, sugar, vinegar, apples, onion, red wine and spices such as cloves, bay leaves, cinnamon, cardamom and allspice.
Brunede kartofler, boiled potatoes caramelized with sugar and butter.
Risengrød, (rice porridge), a dish that has a special relationship to Christmas.
Rødgrød med fløde, stewed, thickened red berry compote (usually a mix of strawberries, rhubarb, raspberry) served with cream or as topping on ice cream.
Pandekager, a thin, crepe-like pancake, rolled up, often sprinkled with confectioner's sugar, and served with strawberry jam or vanilla ice cream.
Danish strawberries with cream, and sugar served in the summer when in season.
Risalamande (or ris à l'amande), a cold rice pudding mixed with whipped cream, sugar, vanilla beans and chopped almonds, served cold with hot or cold cherry-sauce.
Cakes are usually not served for dessert in Denmark, but as an occasional sweet treat in between meals or at celebrations and particular festive events.
Fraser Black, played by Jesse Birdsall, made his first on-screen appearance on 8 August 2013 [REF].
Fraser approaches the Roscoe family with the offer of business to service his fleet of cars.
It becomes clear that Fraser is a serial criminal and works alongside Trevor Royle (Greg Wood).
In April 2014, Grace decides she wants to murder her father.
Trevor Royle, played by Greg Wood,[REF] made his first screen appearance on 15 April 2013.
Cooper told Kilkelly that "As a character, Trevor is aggressive and a bad egg.
In September 2015, Laura-Jayne Tyler of Inside Soap praised the car crash which killed Dylan and Wood's acting following it, "The Hollyoaks car crash was a thrilling ride - but the most touching part was when Trevor picked out a burial frock for his dead son Dylan.
Trevor arrives to meet Jacqui who is posing as Trudy.
Trevor agrees to hire Doctor Browning a hit man to murder Myra McQueen (Nicole Barber-Lane), who he believes to be stalking him.
When Fraser Black's (Jesse Birdsall) daughter Grace Black (Tamara Wall) arrives in the village, it's not long before Trevor and Grace both give into their feelings for each other and kiss.
After Joe wakes up from his coma, Trevor helps him escape so they can both get rid of Fraser for good.
Trevor is released from prison after new developments in Fraser's murder case which proves that he was innocent and framed for the murder.
Jason Roscoe, played by Alfie Browne-Sykes, debuted on-screen during the episode airing on 23 May 2013.
On 19 November 2013, Amanda Clapham took over the role of Holly and soon enough Jason and Holly got together with the help of Jason's twin brother, Robbie Roscoe's (Charlie Wernham) help.
In April 2014, Jason and Holly ran away from home due to Jason being blackmailed by Sonny Valentine (Aaron Fontaine) and ended up at Holly's grandmother's house where they stay for a few days.
Jason's secret is eventually found out when Holly finds the food he was hiding in his draws and tells his brothers.
Holly eventually finds out about Cindy and Jason's kiss when Robbie accidentally tells her, this leads to Holly confronting him at his work and leaving him embarrassed.
Jason and Holly get married on the 23 February 2016 but at their reception Jason finds out Holly was having an affair with Robbie.
Joseph "Joe" Roscoe, played by Ayden Callaghan, made his first screen appearance on 23 May 2013 [REF].
Joe arrives in the village with his brothers and mother in order for his family to make a new start.
Joe discovers Mercedes and Lockie Campbell's (Nick Rhys) affair, and Joe breaks up with her, however she gets back at him by lying that he is not the father of her baby, even though he is.
Kevin Foster, played by Elliot Balchin made his first screen appearance on 30 January 2013 [REF].
On 20 August 2013, Balchin revealed via his Twitter account that he would be returning to the show.
Kevin arrives for a new job at Chez Chez.
Brendan and his boyfriend now attempt to get Kevin to tell the truth.
Anna Blake (previously Savage) played by Saskia Wickham made her first screen appearance on 15 March 2013.
Anna arrives to care for her wheel chair using son, Will and poses as Ellie, his new care worker.
Anna decides to gain revenge on Patrick and attacks him in his flat.
One months after her death, Will was later arrested for her murders alongside with Texas.
Frank Symes, played by Mark Wingett, made his first screen appearance on 27 June 2013 and departed the following episode.
Frank is a football manager who hires Jim McGinn (Dan Tetsell) and his nightclub for a private function.
Daniel Kilkelly from Digital Spy branded Frank both unscrupulous and a sleazy football manager [REF].
Richie Trent, played by Michael Dixon, made his first screen appearance on 11 July 2013.
Richie meets Sinead in a hotel bar and invites her back to his room.
Rebecca Bowden from Yahoo! said that Richie is a "much younger [and] wealthy potential target" for Sinead, but noted that he is not "as dumb" as her other clients [REF].
Tegan Lomax, played by Jessica Ellis, made her first appearance on 23 October 2013 [REF].
When Tegan first arrives, she starts to experience pains and goes to hospital where it's revealed that she is in labour.
Tegan then runs for student secretary with her opponent being Blessing Chambers (Modupe Adeyeye).
In September 2014 when Leela's boyfriend, Ziggy, is arrested on suspicion of her parents' deaths, Tegan reveals that he was with her and Peri at the time of the crash, letting her take Peri to New Zealand despite Leela not wanting that to happen.
Tegan later helps Ste through his drug addiction and, along with Leela, uses the money from their parents' insurance to pay for his rehab.
In April 2015, Leela and Ziggy plan to get married but Ziggy reveals to Tegan that he loves her, not Leela, and she goes to tell Leela.
Tegan later disowns Leela when she discovers that Leela knew Cameron killed their parents but did nothing about it.
Tegan and Ste then attend court to hear Cameron's sentence for killing their parents.
Nathan "Nate" Tenbury-Newent, played by Tom Turner made his first screen appearance in Hollyoaks on 8 February 2013 [REF].
He later reported that Nate is reacquainted with Cheryl at a business conference in Southport.
Cheryl and Leanne Holiday (Jessica Forrest) pitch a potential new idea to a company but Cheryl is shocked to see Nate there.
Danny Lomax, played by Stephen Billington, made his first screen appearance on 8 July 2013.
A writer from the Hollyoaks website described Danny as "charismatic, charming, pretty-sweeting-captivating".
In an unpublicised storyline twist, Danny is revealed to be Ste Hay's (Kieron Richardson) biological father.
Danny arrives as a drama supply teacher at Hollyoaks High to organise a production with John Paul.
In 2014, Peri sees Danny kissing John Paul on a camera she had set up.
Of Danny's arrival, a writer from Fabulous magazine said that "there's never a dull moment in Hollyoaks" and quipped that Danny wanted to get involved with John Paul "in more ways than one" [REF].
David "Ziggy" Roscoe, played by Fabrizio Santino, made his first screen appearance on 23 May 2013 [REF].
In August 2013, Ziggy begins a relationship with Ruby Button (Anna Shaffer), but he cheats on her with Frankie Osborne and the relationship ends.
Two years later, Cameron was later arrested for the murder of Celine McQueen, him and his brother Joe Roscoe, Nico Blake, Danny and Sam Lomax and Lockie Campbell.
The Centre Party, whose pragmatic principles generally left it open to supporting either a monarchical or republican form of government, proved one of the mainstays of the Weimar Republic, continuing the cooperation with SPD and DDP in the Weimar Coalition.
The party was a polyglot coalition of Catholic politicians, ranging from leftists like Matthias Erzberger and Joseph Wirth to right-wingers like Franz von Papen.
The Centre had a share of the odium attached to the so-called "Weimar Establishment" which was blamed, especially on the right, for the "stab in the back" of the German army at the end of the war, as well as for the humiliations of the Versailles Treaty and reparations.
Although the parties of the Weimar Coalition remained the base of the Weimar Republic, they could not agree to resume a formal coalition government, especially because of disagreements between the Centre Party and the Social Democrats on issues like religious schools or a nationwide Concordat with the Holy See.
After the break-up of the Weimar Coalition, in June 1920 the Centre's Konstantin Fehrenbach formed a new cabinet that also included the left-liberal DDP and the national-liberal German People's Party (DVP).
In May 1921 the Weimar Coalition once again resumed government under the Centre's Joseph Wirth as Chancellor, but this Coalition collapsed again in November 1922.
In August 1923 the DVP's Gustav Stresemann formed a Grand Coalition administration, comprising the Centre, both Liberal parties and the Social Democrats, which lasted until November, when the Social Democrats left the coalition and the Centre's Wilhelm Marx became chancellor of a cabinet of the remaining parties.
In January 1925 the non-affiliated Hans Luther was appointed chancellor and formed a coalition between the Centre, both Liberal parties, the BVP and, for the first time, the right-wing German National People's Party (DNVP).
In the same year Wilhelm Marx was the Centre's candidate in the presidential elections.
In May 1926 Chancellor Luther resigned and Marx again assumed his former office.
In June 1928, the general elections had resulted in losses for the government parties and in gains for the Social Democrats and the Communists.
During the years of the Weimar Republic debates about the Catholic character of the party, as described above, persisted.
The Centre Party belongs to the political spectrum of "Political Catholicism" that, emerging in the early 19th century after the turmoil of the Napoleonic wars, had changed the political face of Germany.
The first major conflict between the Roman Catholic Church and a Protestant state was the "Colonian Church conflict", when the Prussian government interfered in the question of mixed marriages and the religious affiliation of children resulting from these.
At that time, one of the founding fathers of Political Catholicism was journalist Joseph Görres, who called upon Catholics to "stand united" for their common goals, "religious liberty and political and civil equality of the denominations".
The Revolution of 1848 brought new opportunities for German Catholics.
In Prussia, the revised constitution of 1850 granted liberties, which in parts even exceeded those of the Frankfurt draft constitution, yet two years later the minister for culture, von Raumer, issued decrees directed mainly against the Jesuits.
Growing anti-Catholic sentiment and policies, including plans for dissolving all monasteries in Prussia, made it clear that a reorganisation of the group was urgently needed in order to protect Catholic minority rights, enshrined in the 1850 constitution, and to bring them over to the emerging nation state.
In June 1870 Peter Reichensberger called on Catholics to unite and, in October, priests, representatives of Catholic federations and the Catholic gentry met at Soest and drew up an election programme.
Preservation of the Church's autonomy and rights, as accepted by the constitution.
Effectual implementation of parity for recognised denominations.
Rejection of any attempt to de-Christianise marriage.
Preservation or founding of denominational schools.
There were also more general demands such as for a more federal, decentralised state, a limitation of state expenditure, a just distribution of taxes, the financial strengthening of the middle classes and the legal "removal of such evil states, that threaten the worker with moral or bodily ruin".
With such a manifesto, the number of Catholic representatives in the Prussian Diet rose considerably.
Three months later, early in 1871, the Catholic representatives to the new national parliament, the Reichstag, also formed a "Centre" faction.
With the passing of the Enabling Act the Centre Party had set in motion its own demise.
At that time, the Centre Party was weakened by massive defections by party members.
The issue of the concordat prolonged Kaas' stay in Rome, leaving the party without a chairman, and on 5 May Kaas finally resigned from his post.
By July, the Centre was the only non-Nazi party that had not been browbeaten into dissolving itself (or had been banned outright, like the SPD).
After the war, the party was refounded, but it was confronted with the emergence of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), a new party formed as a Christian party comprising both Catholics and Protestants.
For some time, however, the party managed to hold on to regional strongholds in North Rhine-Westphalia.
On the national level, in the elections of 1949, it won ten seats in the first Bundestag.
This demise is at least partly because of Helene Wessel.
Wessel resigned from her post and in November 1952 left the party.
Meanwhile, the Centre Party tried to forge an alliance of small parties of Christian persuasion, to offer an alternative to disappointed CDU/CSU voters, but it gained only the support of the "Bavarian Party".
In 1988, the right wing of the party split and formed the "Christian Centre Party".
Since its demise on the national level, the party focuses on local politics, while maintaining the same positions as in the post-war period.
The chairman of the party is Gerhard Woitzik, vice-mayor of the city of Dormagen in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia.
Despite its marginal numbers, the party emphasises continuity to its history by sometimes referring to itself as the "oldest political party of Germany".
Following Brüning's resignation, the Centre Party entered the opposition.
In regard to the government, the Centre Party rejected a "temporal solution", such as Papen's presidial cabinets, and rather advocated a "total solution", i.e., a government according to the rules of the constitution.
As Papen was faced with almost uniform opposition by the parties, he had the Reichstag dissolved.
As Communists and National Socialists together had won the majority of seats, no government coalition could be formed without one of them.
After Papen's attempts to attain Hitler's support for his administration had failed, the Centre began their own negotiations with the National Socialists.
The negotiations were bound for failure, since the aims of the two groups were largely incompatible.
The negotiations were also met with criticism from within the Centre Party.
Though Papen did not expect the negotiations to succeed, he was nonetheless concerned as a success would have led to a presidential crisis, as Hindenburg was unwilling to have a coalition parties dictate the administration.
Papen's act did not end the negotiations between Centre and NSDAP.
Chairman Ludwig Kaas advised President von Hindenburg not to continue Papen's "administration of conflict"; he advocated "national concentration including the National Socialists", but did not comment on an alternative Chancellor, since he considered that the "personal prerogative of President".
In December, the President appointed General Kurt von Schleicher Chancellor, since the cabinet had refused to support Papen's planned coup d'état, a permanent dissolution of the Reichstag.
In 1930 the Grand Coalition fell apart and Heinrich Brüning, from the moderate-conservative wing of the party, was appointed as Chancellor.
In the 1930 elections, the parties of the Grand coalition lost their majority, forcing Brüning to base his administration not on the support of a party coalition but on that of the presidential decree ("Notverordnung") of article 48 of the Constitution.
The Centre consistently supported Brüning's government and in 1932 vigorously campaigned for the re-election of Paul von Hindenburg, calling him a "venerate historical personality" and "the keeper of the constitution".
President Hindenburg, advised by General Kurt von Schleicher, appointed the Catholic nobleman Franz von Papen as Chancellor, a member of the Centre's right wing and former cavalry captain.
The government confronted the newly elected Reichstag with the Enabling Act that would have vested the government with legislative powers for a period of four years.
The Centre Party, whose vote was going to be decisive, was split on the issue of the Enabling Act.
Kaas was aware of the doubtful nature of such guarantees but when the Centre Party assembled on 23 March to decide on their vote, Kaas advised his fellow party members to support the bill, given the "precarious state of the party".
A considerable number of parliamentarians opposed the chairman's course, among these former Chancellors Heinrich Brüning, Joseph Wirth and former minister Adam Stegerwald.
The opponents also argued that Catholic social teaching ruled out participating in acts of revolution.
In the end the majority of Centre parliamentarians supported Kaas' proposal.
The Kulturkampf had reinforced the Catholic character of the Centre Party, but even during it Ludwig Windthorst had defended the party against Bismarck's accusation of being a "denominational party" in describing the Centre as "a political party with a comprehensive political programme and open to anyone, who accepts it".
Loyal to the Pope in church matters, the Centre party steered a course independent of the Holy See on secular matters.
As the Kulturkampf declined, debates about the character of the party emerged culminating in the Centre dispute, in 1906, after Julius Bachem had published the article "We must get out of the tower!"
After the war, Adam Stegerwald, leader of the Christian trade unions, made another attempt at transcending the party's exclusively Catholic character and uniting Germany's fragmented party spectrum.
The party boldly supported the imperial government in the years prior to World War I openly declaring Germany's "great political and moral mission"[REF] in the world.
The same year, the Centre's Georg Count Hertling, formerly Ministers-President of Bavaria, was appointed Chancellor, but he could not overcome the dominance of the military leadership of Hindenburg and Ludendorff.
After the fall of the monarchy, conflict arose between the party and the new Social Democratic government.
The party however was weakened by its Bavarian wing splitting off and forming the Bavarian People's Party (BVP), which emphasised autonomy of the states and also took a more conservative course.
In the 1919 elections for the National Assembly the Centre Party gained 91 representatives, being the second largest party after the Social Democratic Party (SPD).
Meanwhile, von Papen had formed an intrigue to oust his successor.
Though seeing their adversaries Papen and Hugenberg join forces with Hitler, the Centre Party still did not give up building a broad coalition government.
These elections in March 1933 were already marred by the SA's terror, after the Reichstag fire and civil rights had been suspended by President Hindenburg through the Reichstag Fire Decree.
This result shattered the Centre Party's hopes of being indispensable for obtaining a majority in parliament.
Lenin in his earlier writings had professed a desire to eliminate Islam, while recognizing the importance of using Muslim support for their cause [REF].
After the revolution, Lenin had promised national autonomy and religious freedom for Muslims [REF].
Muslims had their own People's Commisariat for Muslim Affairs established in 1918 underneath the administration of mullah Nur-Vakhitov (the only clerical person to ever occupy a state office in Soviet History).
The Baku Muslim clergy in 1923 praised the Soviet regime for having saved Persia and Turkey from 'predatory England' [REF].
Sultan Galiev was the leader of a group of Central Asian Marxists that attempted to reform Islam to make it more modern as well as to support atheism in the Central Asian states.
By the mid-1920s Islamic courts became irrelevant to criminal or civil suits, and they were replaced by Soviet courts.
Galiev's ideas would be attacked in the late 1920s and the anti-religious campaign would reject any policy of special treatment for Islam, and would attack it alongside the other religions.
The Volga basin is subject to periodic droughts that can sometimes last for several years.
Patriarch Tikhon made an appeal to the world community and religious leaders outside of Russia for aid.
Lenin ordered that all of the precious metals, precious stones and valuable material that could be found in religious buildings throughout the country should be confiscated and sold in order to create funds to help relieve the famine [

